To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Stranger, though a still
poorer man should come here, it would not be right for me to insult him,
for all strangers and beggars are from Jove. You must take what you
can get and be thankful, for servants live in fear when they have young
lords for their masters; and this is my misfortune now, for heaven has
hindered the return of him who would have been always good to me and
given me something of my own--a house, a piece of land, a good looking
wife, and all else that a liberal master allows a servant who has worked
hard for him, and whose labour the gods have prospered as they have mine
in the situation which I hold. If my master had grown old here he would
have done great things by me, but he is gone, and I wish that Helen's
whole race were utterly destroyed, for she has been the death of many a
good man. It was this matter that took my master to Ilius, the land of
noble steeds, to fight the Trojans in the cause of king Agamemnon."

As he spoke he bound his girdle round him and went to the styes where
the young sucking pigs were penned. He picked out two which he brought
back with him and sacrificed. He singed them, cut them up, and spitted
them; when the meat was cooked he brought it all in and set it before
Ulysses, hot and still on the spit, whereon Ulysses sprinkled it over
with white barley meal. The swineherd then mixed wine in a bowl of
ivy-wood, and taking a seat opposite Ulysses told him to begin.

"Fall to, stranger," said he, "on a dish of servant's pork. The fat pigs
have to go to the suitors, who eat them up without shame or scruple; but
the blessed gods love not such shameful doings, and respect those who do
what is lawful and right. Even the fierce freebooters who go raiding on
other people's land, and Jove gives them their spoil--even they,
when they have filled their ships and got home again live
conscience-stricken, and look fearfully for judgement; but some god
seems to have told these people that Ulysses is dead and gone; they
will not, therefore, go back to their own homes and make their offers of
marriage in the usual way, but waste his estate by force, without fear
or stint. Not a day or night comes out of heaven, but they sacrifice not
one victim nor two only, and they take the run of his wine, for he was
exceedingly rich. No other great man either in Ithaca or on the mainland
is as rich as he was; he had as much as twenty men put together. I will
tell you what he had. There are twelve herds of cattle upon the main
land, and as many flocks of sheep, there are also twelve droves of pigs,
while his own men and hired strangers feed him twelve widely spreading
herds of goats. Here in Ithaca he runs even large flocks of goats on
the far end of the island, and they are in the charge of excellent goat
herds. Each one of these sends the suitors the best goat in the flock
every day. As for myself, I am in charge of the pigs that you see here,
and I have to keep picking out the best I have and sending it to them."

This was his story, but Ulysses went on eating and drinking ravenously
without a word, brooding his revenge. When he had eaten enough and was
satisfied, the swineherd took the bowl from which he usually drank,
filled it with wine, and gave it to Ulysses, who was pleased, and said
as he took it in his hands, "My friend, who was this master of yours
that bought you and paid for you, so rich and so powerful as you tell
me? You say he perished in the cause of King Agamemnon; tell me who he
was, in case I may have met with such a person. Jove and the other gods
know, but I may be able to give you news of him, for I have travelled
much."

Eumaeus answered, "Old man, no traveller who comes here with news will
get Ulysses' wife and son to believe his story. Nevertheless, tramps in
want of a lodging keep coming with their mouths full of lies, and not a
word of truth; every one who finds his way to Ithaca goes to my mistress
and tells her falsehoods, whereon she takes them in, makes much of them,
and asks them all manner of questions, crying all the time as women will
when they have lost their husbands. And you too, old man, for a shirt
and a cloak would doubtless make up a very pretty story. But the wolves
and birds of prey have long since torn Ulysses to pieces, or the fishes
of the sea have eaten him, and his bones are lying buried deep in sand
upon some foreign shore; he is dead and gone, and a bad business it is
for all his friends--for me especially; go where I may I shall never
find so good a master, not even if I were to go home to my mother and
father where I was bred and born. I do not so much care, however, about
my parents now, though I should dearly like to see them again in my own
country; it is the loss of Ulysses that grieves me most; I cannot speak
of him without reverence though he is here no longer, for he was very
fond of me, and took such care of me that wherever he may be I shall
always honour his memory."

"My friend," replied Ulysses, "you are very positive, and very hard of
belief about your master's coming home again, nevertheless I will not
merely say, but will swear, that he is coming. Do not give me anything
for my news till he has actually come, you may then give me a shirt and
cloak of good wear if you will. I am in great want, but I will not take
anything at all till then, for I hate a man, even as I hate hell fire,
who lets his poverty tempt him into lying. I swear by king Jove, by the
rites of hospitality, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I have now
come, that all will surely happen as I have said it will. Ulysses
will return in this self same year; with the end of this moon and the
beginning of the next he will be here to do vengeance on all those who
are ill treating his wife and son."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Old man, you will neither
get paid for bringing good news, nor will Ulysses ever come home; drink
your wine in peace, and let us talk about something else. Do not keep on
reminding me of all this; it always pains me when any one speaks about
my honoured master. As for your oath we will let it alone, but I only
wish he may come, as do Penelope, his old father Laertes, and his son
Telemachus. I am terribly unhappy too about this same boy of his; he was
running up fast into manhood, and bade fare to be no worse man, face
and figure, than his father, but some one, either god or man, has been
unsettling his mind, so he has gone off to Pylos to try and get news of
his father, and the suitors are lying in wait for him as he is coming
home, in the hope of leaving the house of Arceisius without a name in
Ithaca. But let us say no more about him, and leave him to be taken, or
else to escape if the son of Saturn holds his hand over him to protect
him. And now, old man, tell me your own story; tell me also, for I want
to know, who you are and where you come from. Tell me of your town
and parents, what manner of ship you came in, how crew brought you to
Ithaca, and from what country they professed to come--for you cannot
have come by land."

And Ulysses answered, "I will tell you all about it. If there were meat
and wine enough, and we could stay here in the hut with nothing to do
but to eat and drink while the others go to their work, I could easily
talk on for a whole twelve months without ever finishing the story of
the sorrows with which it has pleased heaven to visit me.

"I am by birth a Cretan; my father was a well to do man, who had many
sons born in marriage, whereas I was the son of a slave whom he had
purchased for a concubine; nevertheless, my father Castor son of Hylax
(whose lineage I claim, and who was held in the highest honour among the
Cretans for his wealth, prosperity, and the valour of his sons) put me
on the same level with my brothers who had been born in wedlock. When,
however, death took him to the house of Hades, his sons divided his
estate and cast lots for their shares, but to me they gave a holding
and little else; nevertheless, my valour enabled me to marry into a rich
family, for I was not given to bragging, or shirking on the field of
battle. It is all over now; still, if you look at the straw you can see
what the ear was, for I have had trouble enough and to spare. Mars and
Minerva made me doughty in war; when I had picked my men to surprise the
enemy with an ambuscade I never gave death so much as a thought, but was
the first to leap forward and spear all whom I could overtake. Such was
I in battle, but I did not care about farm work, nor the frugal home
life of those who would bring up children. My delight was in ships,
fighting, javelins, and arrows--things that most men shudder to think
of; but one man likes one thing and another another, and this was what
I was most naturally inclined to. Before the Achaeans went to Troy,
nine times was I in command of men and ships on foreign service, and I
amassed much wealth. I had my pick of the spoil in the first instance,
and much more was allotted to me later on.

"My house grew apace and I became a great man among the Cretans,
but when Jove counselled that terrible expedition, in which so many
perished, the people required me and Idomeneus to lead their ships to
Troy, and there was no way out of it, for they insisted on our doing
so. There we fought for nine whole years, but in the tenth we sacked the
city of Priam and sailed home again as heaven dispersed us. Then it was
that Jove devised evil against me. I spent but one month happily with my
children, wife, and property, and then I conceived the idea of making a
descent on Egypt, so I fitted out a fine fleet and manned it. I had nine
ships, and the people flocked to fill them. For six days I and my men
made feast, and I found them many victims both for sacrifice to the gods
and for themselves, but on the seventh day we went on board and set sail
from Crete with a fair North wind behind us though we were going down a
river. Nothing went ill with any of our ships, and we had no sickness
on board, but sat where we were and let the ships go as the wind and
steersmen took them. On the fifth day we reached the river Aegyptus;
there I stationed my ships in the river, bidding my men stay by them and
keep guard over them while I sent out scouts to reconnoitre from every
point of vantage.

"But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and ravaged
the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their wives and
children captive. The alarm was soon carried to the city, and when they
heard the war cry, the people came out at daybreak till the plain was
filled with horsemen and foot soldiers and with the gleam of armour.
Then Jove spread panic among my men, and they would no longer face the
enemy, for they found themselves surrounded. The Egyptians killed many
of us, and took the rest alive to do forced labour for them. Jove,
however, put it in my mind to do thus--and I wish I had died then and
there in Egypt instead, for there was much sorrow in store for me--I
took off my helmet and shield and dropped my spear from my hand; then
I went straight up to the king's chariot, clasped his knees and kissed
them, whereon he spared my life, bade me get into his chariot, and took
me weeping to his own home. Many made at me with their ashen spears and
tried to kill me in their fury, but the king protected me, for he feared
the wrath of Jove the protector of strangers, who punishes those who do
evil.

"I stayed there for seven years and got together much money among the
Egyptians, for they all gave me something; but when it was now going on
for eight years there came a certain Phoenician, a cunning rascal, who
had already committed all sorts of villainy, and this man talked me over
into going with him to Phoenicia, where his house and his possessions
lay. I stayed there for a whole twelve months, but at the end of that
time when months and days had gone by till the same season had come
round again, he set me on board a ship bound for Libya, on a pretence
that I was to take a cargo along with him to that place, but really that
he might sell me as a slave and take the money I fetched. I suspected
his intention, but went on board with him, for I could not help it.

"The ship ran before a fresh North wind till we had reached the sea
that lies between Crete and Libya; there, however, Jove counselled their
destruction, for as soon as we were well out from Crete and could see
nothing but sea and sky, he raised a black cloud over our ship and the
sea grew dark beneath it. Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts and
the ship went round and round and was filled with fire and brimstone
as the lightning struck it. The men fell all into the sea; they
were carried about in the water round the ship looking like so many
sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of all chance of getting
home again. I was all dismayed. Jove, however, sent the ship's mast
within my reach, which saved my life, for I clung to it, and drifted
before the fury of the gale. Nine days did I drift but in the darkness
of the tenth night a great wave bore me on to the Thesprotian coast.
There Pheidon king of the Thesprotians entertained me hospitably without
charging me anything at all--for his son found me when I was nearly dead
with cold and fatigue, whereon he raised me by the hand, took me to his
father's house and gave me clothes to wear.

"There it was that I heard news of Ulysses, for the king told me he
had entertained him, and shown him much hospitality while he was on his
homeward journey. He showed me also the treasure of gold, and wrought
iron that Ulysses had got together. There was enough to keep his family
for ten generations, so much had he left in the house of king Pheidon.
But the king said Ulysses had gone to Dodona that he might learn Jove's
mind from the god's high oak tree, and know whether after so long an
absence he should return to Ithaca openly, or in secret. Moreover the
king swore in my presence, making drink-offerings in his own house as
he did so, that the ship was by the water side, and the crew found,
that should take him to his own country. He sent me off however before
Ulysses returned, for there happened to be a Thesprotian ship sailing
for the wheat-growing island of Dulichium, and he told those in charge
of her to be sure and take me safely to King Acastus.

"These men hatched a plot against me that would have reduced me to the
very extreme of misery, for when the ship had got some way out from land
they resolved on selling me as a slave. They stripped me of the shirt
and cloak that I was wearing, and gave me instead the tattered old
clouts in which you now see me; then, towards nightfall, they reached
the tilled lands of Ithaca, and there they bound me with a strong rope
fast in the ship, while they went on shore to get supper by the sea
side. But the gods soon undid my bonds for me, and having drawn my rags
over my head I slid down the rudder into the sea, where I struck out and
swam till I was well clear of them, and came ashore near a thick wood
in which I lay concealed. They were very angry at my having escaped and
went searching about for me, till at last they thought it was no further
use and went back to their ship. The gods, having hidden me thus easily,
then took me to a good man's door--for it seems that I am not to die yet
awhile."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Poor unhappy stranger, I
have found the story of your misfortunes extremely interesting, but that
part about Ulysses is not right; and you will never get me to believe
it. Why should a man like you go about telling lies in this way? I know
all about the return of my master. The gods one and all of them detest
him, or they would have taken him before Troy, or let him die with
friends around him when the days of his fighting were done; for then the
Achaeans would have built a mound over his ashes and his son would have
been heir to his renown, but now the storm winds have spirited him away
we know not whither.

"As for me I live out of the way here with the pigs, and never go to the
town unless when Penelope sends for me on the arrival of some news
about Ulysses. Then they all sit round and ask questions, both those who
grieve over the king's absence, and those who rejoice at it because they
can eat up his property without paying for it. For my own part I have
never cared about asking anyone else since the time when I was taken in
by an Aetolian, who had killed a man and come a long way till at last
he reached my station, and I was very kind to him. He said he had seen
Ulysses with Idomeneus among the Cretans, refitting his ships which had
been damaged in a gale. He said Ulysses would return in the following
summer or autumn with his men, and that he would bring back much wealth.
And now you, you unfortunate old man, since fate has brought you to my
door, do not try to flatter me in this way with vain hopes. It is not
for any such reason that I shall treat you kindly, but only out of
respect for Jove the god of hospitality, as fearing him and pitying
you."

Ulysses answered, "I see that you are of an unbelieving mind; I have
given you my oath, and yet you will not credit me; let us then make a
bargain, and call all the gods in heaven to witness it. If your master
comes home, give me a cloak and shirt of good wear, and send me to
Dulichium where I want to go; but if he does not come as I say he will,
set your men on to me, and tell them to throw me from yonder precipice,
as a warning to tramps not to go about the country telling lies."

"And a pretty figure I should cut then," replied Eumaeus, "both now and
hereafter, if I were to kill you after receiving you into my hut and
showing you hospitality. I should have to say my prayers in good earnest
if I did; but it is just supper time and I hope my men will come in
directly, that we may cook something savoury for supper."

Thus did they converse, and presently the swineherds came up with
the pigs, which were then shut up for the night in their styes, and a
tremendous squealing they made as they were being driven into them. But
Eumaeus called to his men and said, "Bring in the best pig you have,
that I may sacrifice him for this stranger, and we will take toll of him
ourselves. We have had trouble enough this long time feeding pigs, while
others reap the fruit of our labour."

On this he began chopping firewood, while the others brought in a fine
fat five year old boar pig, and set it at the altar. Eumaeus did not
forget the gods, for he was a man of good principles, so the first thing
he did was to cut bristles from the pig's face and throw them into the
fire, praying to all the gods as he did so that Ulysses might return
home again. Then he clubbed the pig with a billet of oak which he had
kept back when he was chopping the firewood, and stunned it, while the
others slaughtered and singed it. Then they cut it up, and Eumaeus began
by putting raw pieces from each joint on to some of the fat; these he
sprinkled with barley meal, and laid upon the embers; they cut the rest
of the meat up small, put the pieces upon the spits and roasted them
till they were done; when they had taken them off the spits they
threw them on to the dresser in a heap. The swineherd, who was a most
equitable man, then stood up to give every one his share. He made seven
portions; one of these he set apart for Mercury the son of Maia and the
nymphs, praying to them as he did so; the others he dealt out to the men
man by man. He gave Ulysses some slices cut lengthways down the loin
as a mark of especial honour, and Ulysses was much pleased. "I hope,
Eumaeus," said he, "that Jove will be as well disposed towards you as I
am, for the respect you are showing to an outcast like myself."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Eat, my good fellow, and
enjoy your supper, such as it is. God grants this, and withholds that,
just as he thinks right, for he can do whatever he chooses."

As he spoke he cut off the first piece and offered it as a burnt
sacrifice to the immortal gods; then he made them a drink-offering,
put the cup in the hands of Ulysses, and sat down to his own portion.
Mesaulius brought them their bread; the swineherd had brought this man
on his own account from among the Taphians during his master's absence,
and had paid for him with his own money without saying anything either
to his mistress or Laertes. They then laid their hands upon the good
things that were before them, and when they had had enough to eat and
drink, Mesaulius took away what was left of the bread, and they all went
to bed after having made a hearty supper.

Now the night came on stormy and very dark, for there was no moon. It
poured without ceasing, and the wind blew strong from the West, which is
a wet quarter, so Ulysses thought he would see whether Eumaeus, in the
excellent care he took of him, would take off his own cloak and give
it him, or make one of his men give him one. "Listen to me," said he,
"Eumaeus and the rest of you; when I have said a prayer I will tell you
something. It is the wine that makes me talk in this way; wine will make
even a wise man fall to singing; it will make him chuckle and dance
and say many a word that he had better leave unspoken; still, as I have
begun, I will go on. Would that I were still young and strong as when we
got up an ambuscade before Troy. Menelaus and Ulysses were the leaders,
but I was in command also, for the other two would have it so. When we
had come up to the wall of the city we crouched down beneath our armour
and lay there under cover of the reeds and thick brushwood that grew
about the swamp. It came on to freeze with a North wind blowing; the
snow fell small and fine like hoar frost, and our shields were coated
thick with rime. The others had all got cloaks and shirts, and slept
comfortably enough with their shields about their shoulders, but I had
carelessly left my cloak behind me, not thinking that I should be too
cold, and had gone off in nothing but my shirt and shield. When the
night was two-thirds through and the stars had shifted their places, I
nudged Ulysses who was close to me with my elbow, and he at once gave me
his ear.

"'Ulysses,' said I, 'this cold will be the death of me, for I have no
cloak; some god fooled me into setting off with nothing on but my shirt,
and I do not know what to do.'

"Ulysses, who was as crafty as he was valiant, hit upon the following
plan:

"'Keep still,' said he in a low voice, 'or the others will hear you.'
Then he raised his head on his elbow.

"'My friends,' said he, 'I have had a dream from heaven in my sleep. We
are a long way from the ships; I wish some one would go down and tell
Agamemnon to send us up more men at once.'

"On this Thoas son of Andraemon threw off his cloak and set out running
to the ships, whereon I took the cloak and lay in it comfortably enough
till morning. Would that I were still young and strong as I was in those
days, for then some one of you swineherds would give me a cloak both out
of good will and for the respect due to a brave soldier; but now people
look down upon me because my clothes are shabby."

And Eumaeus answered, "Old man, you have told us an excellent story,
and have said nothing so far but what is quite satisfactory; for the
present, therefore, you shall want neither clothing nor anything else
that a stranger in distress may reasonably expect, but to-morrow morning
you have to shake your own old rags about your body again, for we have
not many spare cloaks nor shirts up here, but every man has only one.
When Ulysses' son comes home again he will give you both cloak and
shirt, and send you wherever you may want to go."

With this he got up and made a bed for Ulysses by throwing some
goatskins and sheepskins on the ground in front of the fire. Here
Ulysses lay down, and Eumaeus covered him over with a great heavy cloak
that he kept for a change in case of extraordinarily bad weather.

Thus did Ulysses sleep, and the young men slept beside him. But the
swineherd did not like sleeping away from his pigs, so he got ready
to go outside, and Ulysses was glad to see that he looked after his
property during his master's absence. First he slung his sword over his
brawny shoulders and put on a thick cloak to keep out the wind. He also
took the skin of a large and well fed goat, and a javelin in case of
attack from men or dogs. Thus equipped he went to his rest where the
pigs were camping under an overhanging rock that gave them shelter from
the North wind.


Book XV

MINERVA SUMMONS TELEMACHUS FROM LACEDAEMON--HE MEETS WITH THEOCLYMENUS
AT PYLOS AND BRINGS HIM TO ITHACA--ON LANDING HE GOES TO THE HUT OF
EUMAEUS.

But Minerva went to the fair city of Lacedaemon to tell Ulysses' son
that he was to return at once. She found him and Pisistratus sleeping
in the forecourt of Menelaus's house; Pisistratus was fast asleep,
but Telemachus could get no rest all night for thinking of his unhappy
father, so Minerva went close up to him and said:

"Telemachus, you should not remain so far away from home any longer, nor
leave your property with such dangerous people in your house; they
will eat up everything you have among them, and you will have been on a
fool's errand. Ask Menelaus to send you home at once if you wish to
find your excellent mother still there when you get back. Her father and
brothers are already urging her to marry Eurymachus, who has given her
more than any of the others, and has been greatly increasing his wedding
presents. I hope nothing valuable may have been taken from the house in
spite of you, but you know what women are--they always want to do the
best they can for the man who marries them, and never give another
thought to the children of their first husband, nor to their father
either when he is dead and done with. Go home, therefore, and put
everything in charge of the most respectable woman servant that you
have, until it shall please heaven to send you a wife of your own. Let
me tell you also of another matter which you had better attend to. The
chief men among the suitors are lying in wait for you in the Strait
{128} between Ithaca and Samos, and they mean to kill you before you
can reach home. I do not much think they will succeed; it is more likely
that some of those who are now eating up your property will find a grave
themselves. Sail night and day, and keep your ship well away from the
islands; the god who watches over you and protects you will send you a
fair wind. As soon as you get to Ithaca send your ship and men on to the
town, but yourself go straight to the swineherd who has charge of your
pigs; he is well disposed towards you, stay with him, therefore, for the
night, and then send him to Penelope to tell her that you have got back
safe from Pylos."

Then she went back to Olympus; but Telemachus stirred Pisistratus with
his heel to rouse him, and said, "Wake up Pisistratus, and yoke the
horses to the chariot, for we must set off home." {129}

But Pisistratus said, "No matter what hurry we are in we cannot drive
in the dark. It will be morning soon; wait till Menelaus has brought his
presents and put them in the chariot for us; and let him say good bye to
us in the usual way. So long as he lives a guest should never forget a
host who has shown him kindness."

As he spoke day began to break, and Menelaus, who had already risen,
leaving Helen in bed, came towards them. When Telemachus saw him he
put on his shirt as fast as he could, threw a great cloak over his
shoulders, and went out to meet him. "Menelaus," said he, "let me go
back now to my own country, for I want to get home."

And Menelaus answered, "Telemachus, if you insist on going I will not
detain you. I do not like to see a host either too fond of his guest or
too rude to him. Moderation is best in all things, and not letting a
man go when he wants to do so is as bad as telling him to go if he would
like to stay. One should treat a guest well as long as he is in the
house and speed him when he wants to leave it. Wait, then, till I
can get your beautiful presents into your chariot, and till you have
yourself seen them. I will tell the women to prepare a sufficient dinner
for you of what there may be in the house; it will be at once more
proper and cheaper for you to get your dinner before setting out on
such a long journey. If, moreover, you have a fancy for making a tour
in Hellas or in the Peloponnese, I will yoke my horses, and will conduct
you myself through all our principal cities. No one will send us away
empty handed; every one will give us something--a bronze tripod, a
couple of mules, or a gold cup."

"Menelaus," replied Telemachus, "I want to go home at once, for when
I came away I left my property without protection, and fear that
while looking for my father I shall come to ruin myself, or find that
something valuable has been stolen during my absence."

When Menelaus heard this he immediately told his wife and servants to
prepare a sufficient dinner from what there might be in the house. At
this moment Eteoneus joined him, for he lived close by and had just got
up; so Menelaus told him to light the fire and cook some meat, which he
at once did. Then Menelaus went down into his fragrant store room, {130}
not alone, but Helen went too, with Megapenthes. When he reached the
place where the treasures of his house were kept, he selected a double
cup, and told his son Megapenthes to bring also a silver mixing bowl.
Meanwhile Helen went to the chest where she kept the lovely dresses
which she had made with her own hands, and took out one that was largest
and most beautifully enriched with embroidery; it glittered like a star,
and lay at the very bottom of the chest. {131} Then they all came back
through the house again till they got to Telemachus, and Menelaus said,
"Telemachus, may Jove, the mighty husband of Juno, bring you safely home
according to your desire. I will now present you with the finest and
most precious piece of plate in all my house. It is a mixing bowl of
pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with gold, and it is the
work of Vulcan. Phaedimus king of the Sidonians made me a present of it
in the course of a visit that I paid him while I was on my return home.
I should like to give it to you."

With these words he placed the double cup in the hands of Telemachus,
while Megapenthes brought the beautiful mixing bowl and set it before
him. Hard by stood lovely Helen with the robe ready in her hand.

"I too, my son," said she, "have something for you as a keepsake from
the hand of Helen; it is for your bride to wear upon her wedding day.
Till then, get your dear mother to keep it for you; thus may you go back
rejoicing to your own country and to your home."

So saying she gave the robe over to him and he received it gladly. Then
Pisistratus put the presents into the chariot, and admired them all as
he did so. Presently Menelaus took Telemachus and Pisistratus into the
house, and they both of them sat down to table. A maid servant brought
them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silver basin
for them to wash their hands, and she drew a clean table beside them;
an upper servant brought them bread and offered them many good things of
what there was in the house. Eteoneus carved the meat and gave them each
their portions, while Megapenthes poured out the wine. Then they laid
their hands upon the good things that were before them, but as soon as
they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus and Pisistratus yoked
the horses, and took their places in the chariot. They drove out through
the inner gateway and under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court,
and Menelaus came after them with a golden goblet of wine in his right
hand that they might make a drink-offering before they set out. He stood
in front of the horses and pledged them, saying, "Farewell to both of
you; see that you tell Nestor how I have treated you, for he was as
kind to me as any father could be while we Achaeans were fighting before
Troy."

"We will be sure, sir," answered Telemachus, "to tell him everything as
soon as we see him. I wish I were as certain of finding Ulysses returned
when I get back to Ithaca, that I might tell him of the very great
kindness you have shown me and of the many beautiful presents I am
taking with me."

As he was thus speaking a bird flew on his right hand--an eagle with a
great white goose in its talons which it had carried off from the farm
yard--and all the men and women were running after it and shouting. It
came quite close up to them and flew away on their right hands in front
of the horses. When they saw it they were glad, and their hearts took
comfort within them, whereon Pisistratus said, "Tell me, Menelaus, has
heaven sent this omen for us or for you?"

Menelaus was thinking what would be the most proper answer for him to
make, but Helen was too quick for him and said, "I will read this matter
as heaven has put it in my heart, and as I doubt not that it will come
to pass. The eagle came from the mountain where it was bred and has
its nest, and in like manner Ulysses, after having travelled far and
suffered much, will return to take his revenge--if indeed he is not back
already and hatching mischief for the suitors."

"May Jove so grant it," replied Telemachus, "if it should prove to be
so, I will make vows to you as though you were a god, even when I am at
home."

As he spoke he lashed his horses and they started off at full speed
through the town towards the open country. They swayed the yoke upon
their necks and travelled the whole day long till the sun set and
darkness was over all the land. Then they reached Pherae, where Diocles
lived who was son of Ortilochus, the son of Alpheus. There they passed
the night and were treated hospitably. When the child of morning,
rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and their
places in the chariot. They drove out through the inner gateway and
under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court. Then Pisistratus lashed
his horses on and they flew forward nothing loath; ere long they came to
Pylos, and then Telemachus said:

"Pisistratus, I hope you will promise to do what I am going to ask you.
You know our fathers were old friends before us; moreover, we are both
of an age, and this journey has brought us together still more closely;
do not, therefore, take me past my ship, but leave me there, for if I go
to your father's house he will try to keep me in the warmth of his good
will towards me, and I must go home at once."

Pisistratus thought how he should do as he was asked, and in the end he
deemed it best to turn his horses towards the ship, and put Menelaus's
beautiful presents of gold and raiment in the stern of the vessel. Then
he said, "Go on board at once and tell your men to do so also before
I can reach home to tell my father. I know how obstinate he is, and am
sure he will not let you go; he will come down here to fetch you, and he
will not go back without you. But he will be very angry."

With this he drove his goodly steeds back to the city of the Pylians and
soon reached his home, but Telemachus called the men together and gave
his orders. "Now, my men," said he, "get everything in order on board
the ship, and let us set out home."

Thus did he speak, and they went on board even as he had said. But as
Telemachus was thus busied, praying also and sacrificing to Minerva
in the ship's stern, there came to him a man from a distant country,
a seer, who was flying from Argos because he had killed a man. He was
descended from Melampus, who used to live in Pylos, the land of sheep;
he was rich and owned a great house, but he was driven into exile by the
great and powerful king Neleus. Neleus seized his goods and held them
for a whole year, during which he was a close prisoner in the house
of king Phylacus, and in much distress of mind both on account of the
daughter of Neleus and because he was haunted by a great sorrow that
dread Erinys had laid upon him. In the end, however, he escaped with his
life, drove the cattle from Phylace to Pylos, avenged the wrong that had
been done him, and gave the daughter of Neleus to his brother. Then he
left the country and went to Argos, where it was ordained that he should
reign over much people. There he married, established himself, and had
two famous sons Antiphates and Mantius. Antiphates became father of
Oicleus, and Oicleus of Amphiaraus, who was dearly loved both by Jove
and by Apollo, but he did not live to old age, for he was killed
in Thebes by reason of a woman's gifts. His sons were Alcmaeon
and Amphilochus. Mantius, the other son of Melampus, was father to
Polypheides and Cleitus. Aurora, throned in gold, carried off Cleitus
for his beauty's sake, that he might dwell among the immortals, but
Apollo made Polypheides the greatest seer in the whole world now that
Amphiaraus was dead. He quarrelled with his father and went to live in
Hyperesia, where he remained and prophesied for all men.

His son, Theoclymenus, it was who now came up to Telemachus as he was
making drink-offerings and praying in his ship. "Friend," said he,
"now that I find you sacrificing in this place, I beseech you by your
sacrifices themselves, and by the god to whom you make them, I pray you
also by your own head and by those of your followers tell me the truth
and nothing but the truth. Who and whence are you? Tell me also of your
town and parents."

Telemachus said, "I will answer you quite truly. I am from Ithaca, and
my father is Ulysses, as surely as that he ever lived. But he has come
to some miserable end. Therefore I have taken this ship and got my crew
together to see if I can hear any news of him, for he has been away a
long time."

"I too," answered Theoclymenus, "am an exile, for I have killed a man
of my own race. He has many brothers and kinsmen in Argos, and they
have great power among the Argives. I am flying to escape death at their
hands, and am thus doomed to be a wanderer on the face of the earth. I
am your suppliant; take me, therefore, on board your ship that they may
not kill me, for I know they are in pursuit."

"I will not refuse you," replied Telemachus, "if you wish to join us.
Come, therefore, and in Ithaca we will treat you hospitably according to
what we have."

On this he received Theoclymenus' spear and laid it down on the deck of
the ship. He went on board and sat in the stern, bidding Theoclymenus
sit beside him; then the men let go the hawsers. Telemachus told them to
catch hold of the ropes, and they made all haste to do so. They set the
mast in its socket in the cross plank, raised it and made it fast with
the forestays, and they hoisted their white sails with sheets of twisted
ox hide. Minerva sent them a fair wind that blew fresh and strong to
take the ship on her course as fast as possible. Thus then they passed
by Crouni and Chalcis.

Presently the sun set and darkness was over all the land. The vessel
made a quick passage to Pheae and thence on to Elis, where the Epeans
rule. Telemachus then headed her for the flying islands, {132} wondering
within himself whether he should escape death or should be taken
prisoner.

Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd were eating their supper in the hut,
and the men supped with them. As soon as they had had to eat and drink,
Ulysses began trying to prove the swineherd and see whether he would
continue to treat him kindly, and ask him to stay on at the station or
pack him off to the city; so he said:

"Eumaeus, and all of you, to-morrow I want to go away and begin begging
about the town, so as to be no more trouble to you or to your men. Give
me your advice therefore, and let me have a good guide to go with me
and show me the way. I will go the round of the city begging as I needs
must, to see if any one will give me a drink and a piece of bread. I
should like also to go to the house of Ulysses and bring news of her
husband to Queen Penelope. I could then go about among the suitors and
see if out of all their abundance they will give me a dinner. I should
soon make them an excellent servant in all sorts of ways. Listen and
believe when I tell you that by the blessing of Mercury who gives grace
and good name to the works of all men, there is no one living who would
make a more handy servant than I should--to put fresh wood on the fire,
chop fuel, carve, cook, pour out wine, and do all those services that
poor men have to do for their betters."

The swineherd was very much disturbed when he heard this. "Heaven help
me," he exclaimed, "what ever can have put such a notion as that into
your head? If you go near the suitors you will be undone to a certainty,
for their pride and insolence reach the very heavens. They would never
think of taking a man like you for a servant. Their servants are all
young men, well dressed, wearing good cloaks and shirts, with well
looking faces and their hair always tidy, the tables are kept quite
clean and are loaded with bread, meat, and wine. Stay where you are,
then; you are not in anybody's way; I do not mind your being here, no
more do any of the others, and when Telemachus comes home he will give
you a shirt and cloak and will send you wherever you want to go."

Ulysses answered, "I hope you may be as dear to the gods as you are to
me, for having saved me from going about and getting into trouble; there
is nothing worse than being always on the tramp; still, when men have
once got low down in the world they will go through a great deal on
behalf of their miserable bellies. Since, however, you press me to stay
here and await the return of Telemachus, tell me about Ulysses' mother,
and his father whom he left on the threshold of old age when he set
out for Troy. Are they still living or are they already dead and in the
house of Hades?"

"I will tell you all about them," replied Eumaeus, "Laertes is still
living and prays heaven to let him depart peacefully in his own house,
for he is terribly distressed about the absence of his son, and also
about the death of his wife, which grieved him greatly and aged him more
than anything else did. She came to an unhappy end {133} through sorrow
for her son: may no friend or neighbour who has dealt kindly by me come
to such an end as she did. As long as she was still living, though she
was always grieving, I used to like seeing her and asking her how she
did, for she brought me up along with her daughter Ctimene, the youngest
of her children; we were boy and girl together, and she made little
difference between us. When, however, we both grew up, they sent Ctimene
to Same and received a splendid dowry for her. As for me, my mistress
gave me a good shirt and cloak with a pair of sandals for my feet, and
sent me off into the country, but she was just as fond of me as ever.
This is all over now. Still it has pleased heaven to prosper my work in
the situation which I now hold. I have enough to eat and drink, and can
find something for any respectable stranger who comes here; but there
is no getting a kind word or deed out of my mistress, for the house has
fallen into the hands of wicked people. Servants want sometimes to see
their mistress and have a talk with her; they like to have something
to eat and drink at the house, and something too to take back with them
into the country. This is what will keep servants in a good humour."

Ulysses answered, "Then you must have been a very little fellow,
Eumaeus, when you were taken so far away from your home and parents.
Tell me, and tell me true, was the city in which your father and mother
lived sacked and pillaged, or did some enemies carry you off when you
were alone tending sheep or cattle, ship you off here, and sell you for
whatever your master gave them?"

"Stranger," replied Eumaeus, "as regards your question: sit still, make
yourself comfortable, drink your wine, and listen to me. The nights
are now at their longest; there is plenty of time both for sleeping and
sitting up talking together; you ought not to go to bed till bed time,
too much sleep is as bad as too little; if any one of the others wishes
to go to bed let him leave us and do so; he can then take my master's
pigs out when he has done breakfast in the morning. We too will sit here
eating and drinking in the hut, and telling one another stories about
our misfortunes; for when a man has suffered much, and been buffeted
about in the world, he takes pleasure in recalling the memory of sorrows
that have long gone by. As regards your question, then, my tale is as
follows:

"You may have heard of an island called Syra that lies over above
Ortygia, {134} where the land begins to turn round and look in another
direction. {135} It is not very thickly peopled, but the soil is good,
with much pasture fit for cattle and sheep, and it abounds with wine
and wheat. Dearth never comes there, nor are the people plagued by any
sickness, but when they grow old Apollo comes with Diana and kills them
with his painless shafts. It contains two communities, and the whole
country is divided between these two. My father Ctesius son of Ormenus,
a man comparable to the gods, reigned over both.

"Now to this place there came some cunning traders from Phoenicia (for
the Phoenicians are great mariners) in a ship which they had freighted
with gewgaws of all kinds. There happened to be a Phoenician woman in
my father's house, very tall and comely, and an excellent servant; these
scoundrels got hold of her one day when she was washing near their ship,
seduced her, and cajoled her in ways that no woman can resist, no matter
how good she may be by nature. The man who had seduced her asked her who
she was and where she came from, and on this she told him her father's
name. 'I come from Sidon,' said she, 'and am daughter to Arybas, a
man rolling in wealth. One day as I was coming into the town from the
country, some Taphian pirates seized me and took me here over the sea,
where they sold me to the man who owns this house, and he gave them
their price for me.'

"The man who had seduced her then said, 'Would you like to come along
with us to see the house of your parents and your parents themselves?
They are both alive and are said to be well off.'

"'I will do so gladly,' answered she, 'if you men will first swear me a
solemn oath that you will do me no harm by the way.'

"They all swore as she told them, and when they had completed their oath
the woman said, 'Hush; and if any of your men meets me in the street or
at the well, do not let him speak to me, for fear some one should go and
tell my master, in which case he would suspect something. He would put
me in prison, and would have all of you murdered; keep your own counsel
therefore; buy your merchandise as fast as you can, and send me word
when you have done loading. I will bring as much gold as I can lay my
hands on, and there is something else also that I can do towards paying
my fare. I am nurse to the son of the good man of the house, a funny
little fellow just able to run about. I will carry him off in your ship,
and you will get a great deal of money for him if you take him and sell
him in foreign parts.'

"On this she went back to the house. The Phoenicians stayed a whole
year till they had loaded their ship with much precious merchandise,
and then, when they had got freight enough, they sent to tell the
woman. Their messenger, a very cunning fellow, came to my father's house
bringing a necklace of gold with amber beads strung among it; and
while my mother and the servants had it in their hands admiring it and
bargaining about it, he made a sign quietly to the woman and then went
back to the ship, whereon she took me by the hand and led me out of the
house. In the fore part of the house she saw the tables set with
the cups of guests who had been feasting with my father, as being in
attendance on him; these were now all gone to a meeting of the public
assembly, so she snatched up three cups and carried them off in the
bosom of her dress, while I followed her, for I knew no better. The sun
was now set, and darkness was over all the land, so we hurried on as
fast as we could till we reached the harbour, where the Phoenician ship
was lying. When they had got on board they sailed their ways over the
sea, taking us with them, and Jove sent then a fair wind; six days did
we sail both night and day, but on the seventh day Diana struck the
woman and she fell heavily down into the ship's hold as though she were
a sea gull alighting on the water; so they threw her overboard to the
seals and fishes, and I was left all sorrowful and alone. Presently the
winds and waves took the ship to Ithaca, where Laertes gave sundry of
his chattels for me, and thus it was that ever I came to set eyes upon
this country."

Ulysses answered, "Eumaeus, I have heard the story of your misfortunes
with the most lively interest and pity, but Jove has given you good as
well as evil, for in spite of everything you have a good master, who
sees that you always have enough to eat and drink; and you lead a good
life, whereas I am still going about begging my way from city to city."

Thus did they converse, and they had only a very little time left for
sleep, for it was soon daybreak. In the mean time Telemachus and his
crew were nearing land, so they loosed the sails, took down the mast,
and rowed the ship into the harbour. {136} They cast out their mooring
stones and made fast the hawsers; they then got out upon the sea shore,
mixed their wine, and got dinner ready. As soon as they had had enough
to eat and drink Telemachus said, "Take the ship on to the town, but
leave me here, for I want to look after the herdsmen on one of my farms.
In the evening, when I have seen all I want, I will come down to the
city, and to-morrow morning in return for your trouble I will give you
all a good dinner with meat and wine." {137}

Then Theoclymenus said, "And what, my dear young friend, is to become of
me? To whose house, among all your chief men, am I to repair? or shall I
go straight to your own house and to your mother?"

"At any other time," replied Telemachus, "I should have bidden you go to
my own house, for you would find no want of hospitality; at the present
moment, however, you would not be comfortable there, for I shall be
away, and my mother will not see you; she does not often show herself
even to the suitors, but sits at her loom weaving in an upper chamber,
out of their way; but I can tell you a man whose house you can go
to--I mean Eurymachus the son of Polybus, who is held in the highest
estimation by every one in Ithaca. He is much the best man and the most
persistent wooer, of all those who are paying court to my mother and
trying to take Ulysses' place. Jove, however, in heaven alone knows
whether or no they will come to a bad end before the marriage takes
place."

As he was speaking a bird flew by upon his right hand--a hawk, Apollo's
messenger. It held a dove in its talons, and the feathers, as it tore
them off, {138} fell to the ground midway between Telemachus and the
ship. On this Theoclymenus called him apart and caught him by the hand.
"Telemachus," said he, "that bird did not fly on your right hand without
having been sent there by some god. As soon as I saw it I knew it was an
omen; it means that you will remain powerful and that there will be no
house in Ithaca more royal than your own."

"I wish it may prove so," answered Telemachus. "If it does, I will show
you so much good will and give you so many presents that all who meet
you will congratulate you."

Then he said to his friend Piraeus, "Piraeus, son of Clytius, you have
throughout shown yourself the most willing to serve me of all those who
have accompanied me to Pylos; I wish you would take this stranger to
your own house and entertain him hospitably till I can come for him."

And Piraeus answered, "Telemachus, you may stay away as long as you
please, but I will look after him for you, and he shall find no lack of
hospitality."

As he spoke he went on board, and bade the others do so also and loose
the hawsers, so they took their places in the ship. But Telemachus
bound on his sandals, and took a long and doughty spear with a head
of sharpened bronze from the deck of the ship. Then they loosed the
hawsers, thrust the ship off from land, and made on towards the city
as they had been told to do, while Telemachus strode on as fast as he
could, till he reached the homestead where his countless herds of
swine were feeding, and where dwelt the excellent swineherd, who was so
devoted a servant to his master.


Book XVI

ULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO TELEMACHUS.

Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd had lit a fire in the hut and were
were getting breakfast ready at daybreak, for they had sent the men out
with the pigs. When Telemachus came up, the dogs did not bark but fawned
upon him, so Ulysses, hearing the sound of feet and noticing that the
dogs did not bark, said to Eumaeus:

"Eumaeus, I hear footsteps; I suppose one of your men or some one of
your acquaintance is coming here, for the dogs are fawning upon him and
not barking."

The words were hardly out of his mouth before his son stood at the door.
Eumaeus sprang to his feet, and the bowls in which he was mixing wine
fell from his hands, as he made towards his master. He kissed his head
and both his beautiful eyes, and wept for joy. A father could not be
more delighted at the return of an only son, the child of his old age,
after ten years' absence in a foreign country and after having gone
through much hardship. He embraced him, kissed him all over as though he
had come back from the dead, and spoke fondly to him saying:

"So you are come, Telemachus, light of my eyes that you are. When I
heard you had gone to Pylos I made sure I was never going to see you any
more. Come in, my dear child, and sit down, that I may have a good look
at you now you are home again; it is not very often you come into
the country to see us herdsmen; you stick pretty close to the town
generally. I suppose you think it better to keep an eye on what the
suitors are doing."

"So be it, old friend," answered Telemachus, "but I am come now because
I want to see you, and to learn whether my mother is still at her
old home or whether some one else has married her, so that the bed of
Ulysses is without bedding and covered with cobwebs."

"She is still at the house," replied Eumaeus, "grieving and breaking her
heart, and doing nothing but weep, both night and day continually."

As he spoke he took Telemachus' spear, whereon he crossed the stone
threshold and came inside. Ulysses rose from his seat to give him place
as he entered, but Telemachus checked him; "Sit down, stranger," said
he, "I can easily find another seat, and there is one here who will lay
it for me."

Ulysses went back to his own place, and Eumaeus strewed some green
brushwood on the floor and threw a sheepskin on top of it for Telemachus
to sit upon. Then the swineherd brought them platters of cold meat, the
remains from what they had eaten the day before, and he filled the bread
baskets with bread as fast as he could. He mixed wine also in bowls of
ivy-wood, and took his seat facing Ulysses. Then they laid their hands
on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had
enough to eat and drink Telemachus said to Eumaeus, "Old friend, where
does this stranger come from? How did his crew bring him to Ithaca, and
who were they?--for assuredly he did not come here by land."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "My son, I will tell you
the real truth. He says he is a Cretan, and that he has been a great
traveller. At this moment he is running away from a Thesprotian ship,
and has taken refuge at my station, so I will put him into your hands.
Do whatever you like with him, only remember that he is your suppliant."

"I am very much distressed," said Telemachus, "by what you have just
told me. How can I take this stranger into my house? I am as yet young,
and am not strong enough to hold my own if any man attacks me. My mother
cannot make up her mind whether to stay where she is and look after the
house out of respect for public opinion and the memory of her husband,
or whether the time is now come for her to take the best man of those
who are wooing her, and the one who will make her the most advantageous
offer; still, as the stranger has come to your station I will find him
a cloak and shirt of good wear, with a sword and sandals, and will send
him wherever he wants to go. Or if you like you can keep him here at the
station, and I will send him clothes and food that he may be no burden
on you and on your men; but I will not have him go near the suitors,
for they are very insolent, and are sure to ill treat him in a way that
would greatly grieve me; no matter how valiant a man may be he can do
nothing against numbers, for they will be too strong for him."

Then Ulysses said, "Sir, it is right that I should say something myself.
I am much shocked about what you have said about the insolent way in
which the suitors are behaving in despite of such a man as you are. Tell
me, do you submit to such treatment tamely, or has some god set your
people against you? May you not complain of your brothers--for it is to
these that a man may look for support, however great his quarrel may be?
I wish I were as young as you are and in my present mind; if I were son
to Ulysses, or, indeed, Ulysses himself, I would rather some one came
and cut my head off, but I would go to the house and be the bane of
every one of these men. {139} If they were too many for me--I being
single-handed--I would rather die fighting in my own house than see such
disgraceful sights day after day, strangers grossly maltreated, and men
dragging the women servants about the house in an unseemly way, wine
drawn recklessly, and bread wasted all to no purpose for an end that
shall never be accomplished."

And Telemachus answered, "I will tell you truly everything. There is no
enmity between me and my people, nor can I complain of brothers, to whom
a man may look for support however great his quarrel may be. Jove has
made us a race of only sons. Laertes was the only son of Arceisius, and
Ulysses only son of Laertes. I am myself the only son of Ulysses who
left me behind him when he went away, so that I have never been of any
use to him. Hence it comes that my house is in the hands of numberless
marauders; for the chiefs from all the neighbouring islands, Dulichium,
Same, Zacynthus, as also all the principal men of Ithaca itself, are
eating up my house under the pretext of paying court to my mother, who
will neither say point blank that she will not marry, nor yet bring
matters to an end, so they are making havoc of my estate, and before
long will do so with myself into the bargain. The issue, however,
rests with heaven. But do you, old friend Eumaeus, go at once and tell
Penelope that I am safe and have returned from Pylos. Tell it to herself
alone, and then come back here without letting any one else know, for
there are many who are plotting mischief against me."

"I understand and heed you," replied Eumaeus; "you need instruct me no
further, only as I am going that way say whether I had not better let
poor Laertes know that you are returned. He used to superintend the work
on his farm in spite of his bitter sorrow about Ulysses, and he would
eat and drink at will along with his servants; but they tell me that
from the day on which you set out for Pylos he has neither eaten nor
drunk as he ought to do, nor does he look after his farm, but sits
weeping and wasting the flesh from off his bones."

"More's the pity," answered Telemachus, "I am sorry for him, but we must
leave him to himself just now. If people could have everything their own
way, the first thing I should choose would be the return of my father;
but go, and give your message; then make haste back again, and do not
turn out of your way to tell Laertes. Tell my mother to send one of her
women secretly with the news at once, and let him hear it from her."

Thus did he urge the swineherd; Eumaeus, therefore, took his sandals,
bound them to his feet, and started for the town. Minerva watched
him well off the station, and then came up to it in the form of a
woman--fair, stately, and wise. She stood against the side of the entry,
and revealed herself to Ulysses, but Telemachus could not see her, and
knew not that she was there, for the gods do not let themselves be seen
by everybody. Ulysses saw her, and so did the dogs, for they did not
bark, but went scared and whining off to the other side of the yards.
She nodded her head and motioned to Ulysses with her eyebrows; whereon
he left the hut and stood before her outside the main wall of the yards.
Then she said to him:

"Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is now time for you to tell your
son: do not keep him in the dark any longer, but lay your plans for the
destruction of the suitors, and then make for the town. I will not be
long in joining you, for I too am eager for the fray."

As she spoke she touched him with her golden wand. First she threw
a fair clean shirt and cloak about his shoulders; then she made him
younger and of more imposing presence; she gave him back his colour,
filled out his cheeks, and let his beard become dark again. Then she
went away and Ulysses came back inside the hut. His son was astounded
when he saw him, and turned his eyes away for fear he might be looking
upon a god.

"Stranger," said he, "how suddenly you have changed from what you were
a moment or two ago. You are dressed differently and your colour is not
the same. Are you some one or other of the gods that live in heaven? If
so, be propitious to me till I can make you due sacrifice and offerings
of wrought gold. Have mercy upon me."

And Ulysses said, "I am no god, why should you take me for one? I am
your father, on whose account you grieve and suffer so much at the hands
of lawless men."

As he spoke he kissed his son, and a tear fell from his cheek on to the
ground, for he had restrained all tears till now. But Telemachus could
not yet believe that it was his father, and said:

"You are not my father, but some god is flattering me with vain hopes
that I may grieve the more hereafter; no mortal man could of himself
contrive to do as you have been doing, and make yourself old and young
at a moment's notice, unless a god were with him. A second ago you
were old and all in rags, and now you are like some god come down from
heaven."

Ulysses answered, "Telemachus, you ought not to be so immeasurably
astonished at my being really here. There is no other Ulysses who will
come hereafter. Such as I am, it is I, who after long wandering and much
hardship have got home in the twentieth year to my own country. What you
wonder at is the work of the redoubtable goddess Minerva, who does with
me whatever she will, for she can do what she pleases. At one moment she
makes me like a beggar, and the next I am a young man with good clothes
on my back; it is an easy matter for the gods who live in heaven to make
any man look either rich or poor."

As he spoke he sat down, and Telemachus threw his arms about his father
and wept. They were both so much moved that they cried aloud like eagles
or vultures with crooked talons that have been robbed of their half
fledged young by peasants. Thus piteously did they weep, and the sun
would have gone down upon their mourning if Telemachus had not suddenly
said, "In what ship, my dear father, did your crew bring you to Ithaca?
Of what nation did they declare themselves to be--for you cannot have
come by land?"

"I will tell you the truth, my son," replied Ulysses. "It was the
Phaeacians who brought me here. They are great sailors, and are in the
habit of giving escorts to any one who reaches their coasts. They took
me over the sea while I was fast asleep, and landed me in Ithaca, after
giving me many presents in bronze, gold, and raiment. These things by
heaven's mercy are lying concealed in a cave, and I am now come here on
the suggestion of Minerva that we may consult about killing our enemies.
First, therefore, give me a list of the suitors, with their number, that
I may learn who, and how many, they are. I can then turn the matter
over in my mind, and see whether we two can fight the whole body of them
ourselves, or whether we must find others to help us."

To this Telemachus answered, "Father, I have always heard of your renown
both in the field and in council, but the task you talk of is a very
great one: I am awed at the mere thought of it; two men cannot stand
against many and brave ones. There are not ten suitors only, nor twice
ten, but ten many times over; you shall learn their number at once.
There are fifty-two chosen youths from Dulichium, and they have six
servants; from Same there are twenty-four; twenty young Achaeans from
Zacynthus, and twelve from Ithaca itself, all of them well born. They
have with them a servant Medon, a bard, and two men who can carve at
table. If we face such numbers as this, you may have bitter cause to rue
your coming, and your revenge. See whether you cannot think of some one
who would be willing to come and help us."

"Listen to me," replied Ulysses, "and think whether Minerva and her
father Jove may seem sufficient, or whether I am to try and find some
one else as well."

"Those whom you have named," answered Telemachus, "are a couple of good
allies, for though they dwell high up among the clouds they have power
over both gods and men."

"These two," continued Ulysses, "will not keep long out of the fray,
when the suitors and we join fight in my house. Now, therefore, return
home early to-morrow morning, and go about among the suitors as
before. Later on the swineherd will bring me to the city disguised as a
miserable old beggar. If you see them ill treating me, steel your heart
against my sufferings; even though they drag me feet foremost out of
the house, or throw things at me, look on and do nothing beyond gently
trying to make them behave more reasonably; but they will not listen to
you, for the day of their reckoning is at hand. Furthermore I say, and
lay my saying to your heart; when Minerva shall put it in my mind, I
will nod my head to you, and on seeing me do this you must collect all
the armour that is in the house and hide it in the strong store room.
Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you are removing it; say
that you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke, inasmuch as it
is no longer what it was when Ulysses went away, but has become soiled
and begrimed with soot. Add to this more particularly that you are
afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel over their wine, and that they
may do each other some harm which may disgrace both banquet and wooing,
for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people to use them. But leave
a sword and a spear apiece for yourself and me, and a couple of oxhide
shields so that we can snatch them up at any moment; Jove and Minerva
will then soon quiet these people. There is also another matter; if you
are indeed my son and my blood runs in your veins, let no one know that
Ulysses is within the house--neither Laertes, nor yet the swineherd, nor
any of the servants, nor even Penelope herself. Let you and me exploit
the women alone, and let us also make trial of some other of the men
servants, to see who is on our side and whose hand is against us."

"Father," replied Telemachus, "you will come to know me by and by, and
when you do you will find that I can keep your counsel. I do not think,
however, the plan you propose will turn out well for either of us. Think
it over. It will take us a long time to go the round of the farms and
exploit the men, and all the time the suitors will be wasting your
estate with impunity and without compunction. Prove the women by all
means, to see who are disloyal and who guiltless, but I am not in favour
of going round and trying the men. We can attend to that later on, if
you really have some sign from Jove that he will support you."

Thus did they converse, and meanwhile the ship which had brought
Telemachus and his crew from Pylos had reached the town of Ithaca. When
they had come inside the harbour they drew the ship on to the land;
their servants came and took their armour from them, and they left all
the presents at the house of Clytius. Then they sent a servant to tell
Penelope that Telemachus had gone into the country, but had sent the
ship to the town to prevent her from being alarmed and made unhappy.
This servant and Eumaeus happened to meet when they were both on the
same errand of going to tell Penelope. When they reached the House, the
servant stood up and said to the queen in the presence of the waiting
women, "Your son, Madam, is now returned from Pylos"; but Eumaeus went
close up to Penelope, and said privately all that her son had bidden
him tell her. When he had given his message he left the house with its
outbuildings and went back to his pigs again.

The suitors were surprised and angry at what had happened, so they
went outside the great wall that ran round the outer court, and held
a council near the main entrance. Eurymachus, son of Polybus, was the
first to speak.

"My friends," said he, "this voyage of Telemachus's is a very serious
matter; we had made sure that it would come to nothing. Now, however,
let us draw a ship into the water, and get a crew together to send after
the others and tell them to come back as fast as they can."

He had hardly done speaking when Amphinomus turned in his place and
saw the ship inside the harbour, with the crew lowering her sails, and
putting by their oars; so he laughed, and said to the others, "We need
not send them any message, for they are here. Some god must have told
them, or else they saw the ship go by, and could not overtake her."

On this they rose and went to the water side. The crew then drew the
ship on shore; their servants took their armour from them, and they went
up in a body to the place of assembly, but they would not let any one
old or young sit along with them, and Antinous, son of Eupeithes, spoke
first.

"Good heavens," said he, "see how the gods have saved this man from
destruction. We kept a succession of scouts upon the headlands all day
long, and when the sun was down we never went on shore to sleep, but
waited in the ship all night till morning in the hope of capturing and
killing him; but some god has conveyed him home in spite of us. Let
us consider how we can make an end of him. He must not escape us; our
affair is never likely to come off while he is alive, for he is very
shrewd, and public feeling is by no means all on our side. We must make
haste before he can call the Achaeans in assembly; he will lose no time
in doing so, for he will be furious with us, and will tell all the world
how we plotted to kill him, but failed to take him. The people will not
like this when they come to know of it; we must see that they do us no
hurt, nor drive us from our own country into exile. Let us try and
lay hold of him either on his farm away from the town, or on the road
hither. Then we can divide up his property amongst us, and let his
mother and the man who marries her have the house. If this does not
please you, and you wish Telemachus to live on and hold his father's
property, then we must not gather here and eat up his goods in this way,
but must make our offers to Penelope each from his own house, and she
can marry the man who will give the most for her, and whose lot it is to
win her."

They all held their peace until Amphinomus rose to speak. He was the son
of Nisus, who was son to king Aretias, and he was foremost among all the
suitors from the wheat-growing and well grassed island of Dulichium; his
conversation, moreover, was more agreeable to Penelope than that of any
of the other suitors, for he was a man of good natural disposition. "My
friends," said he, speaking to them plainly and in all honestly, "I am
not in favour of killing Telemachus. It is a heinous thing to kill one
who is of noble blood. Let us first take counsel of the gods, and if the
oracles of Jove advise it, I will both help to kill him myself, and will
urge everyone else to do so; but if they dissuade us, I would have you
hold your hands."

Thus did he speak, and his words pleased them well, so they rose
forthwith and went to the house of Ulysses, where they took their
accustomed seats.

Then Penelope resolved that she would show herself to the suitors. She
knew of the plot against Telemachus, for the servant Medon had overheard
their counsels and had told her; she went down therefore to the court
attended by her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she stood by
one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister holding a
veil before her face, and rebuked Antinous saying:

"Antinous, insolent and wicked schemer, they say you are the best
speaker and counsellor of any man your own age in Ithaca, but you are
nothing of the kind. Madman, why should you try to compass the death
of Telemachus, and take no heed of suppliants, whose witness is Jove
himself? It is not right for you to plot thus against one another.
Do you not remember how your father fled to this house in fear of the
people, who were enraged against him for having gone with some Taphian
pirates and plundered the Thesprotians who were at peace with us? They
wanted to tear him in pieces and eat up everything he had, but Ulysses
stayed their hands although they were infuriated, and now you devour his
property without paying for it, and break my heart by wooing his wife
and trying to kill his son. Leave off doing so, and stop the others
also."

To this Eurymachus son of Polybus answered, "Take heart, Queen Penelope
daughter of Icarius, and do not trouble yourself about these matters.
The man is not yet born, nor never will be, who shall lay hands upon
your son Telemachus, while I yet live to look upon the face of the
earth. I say--and it shall surely be--that my spear shall be reddened
with his blood; for many a time has Ulysses taken me on his knees,
held wine up to my lips to drink, and put pieces of meat into my hands.
Therefore Telemachus is much the dearest friend I have, and has nothing
to fear from the hands of us suitors. Of course, if death comes to him
from the gods, he cannot escape it." He said this to quiet her, but in
reality he was plotting against Telemachus.

Then Penelope went upstairs again and mourned her husband till Minerva
shed sleep over her eyes. In the evening Eumaeus got back to Ulysses
and his son, who had just sacrificed a young pig of a year old and were
helping one another to get supper ready; Minerva therefore came up to
Ulysses, turned him into an old man with a stroke of her wand, and
clad him in his old clothes again, for fear that the swineherd might
recognise him and not keep the secret, but go and tell Penelope.

Telemachus was the first to speak. "So you have got back, Eumaeus," said
he. "What is the news of the town? Have the suitors returned, or are
they still waiting over yonder, to take me on my way home?"

"I did not think of asking about that," replied Eumaeus, "when I was in
the town. I thought I would give my message and come back as soon as I
could. I met a man sent by those who had gone with you to Pylos, and he
was the first to tell the news to your mother, but I can say what I saw
with my own eyes; I had just got on to the crest of the hill of Mercury
above the town when I saw a ship coming into harbour with a number of
men in her. They had many shields and spears, and I thought it was the
suitors, but I cannot be sure."

On hearing this Telemachus smiled to his father, but so that Eumaeus
could not see him.

Then, when they had finished their work and the meal was ready, they ate
it, and every man had his full share so that all were satisfied. As
soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, they laid down to rest and
enjoyed the boon of sleep.


Book XVII

TELEMACHUS AND HIS MOTHER MEET--ULYSSES AND EUMAEUS COME DOWN TO THE
TOWN, AND ULYSSES IS INSULTED BY MELANTHIUS--HE IS RECOGNISED BY THE
DOG ARGOS--HE IS INSULTED AND PRESENTLY STRUCK BY ANTINOUS WITH A
STOOL--PENELOPE DESIRES THAT HE SHALL BE SENT TO HER.

When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Telemachus
bound on his sandals and took a strong spear that suited his hands, for
he wanted to go into the city. "Old friend," said he to the swineherd,
"I will now go to the town and show myself to my mother, for she will
never leave off grieving till she has seen me. As for this unfortunate
stranger, take him to the town and let him beg there of any one who will
give him a drink and a piece of bread. I have trouble enough of my own,
and cannot be burdened with other people. If this makes him angry so
much the worse for him, but I like to say what I mean."

Then Ulysses said, "Sir, I do not want to stay here; a beggar can always
do better in town than country, for any one who likes can give him
something. I am too old to care about remaining here at the beck and
call of a master. Therefore let this man do as you have just told him,
and take me to the town as soon as I have had a warm by the fire, and
the day has got a little heat in it. My clothes are wretchedly thin, and
this frosty morning I shall be perished with cold, for you say the city
is some way off."

On this Telemachus strode off through the yards, brooding his revenge
upon the suitors. When he reached home he stood his spear against a
bearing-post of the cloister, crossed the stone floor of the cloister
itself, and went inside.

Nurse Euryclea saw him long before any one else did. She was putting the
fleeces on to the seats, and she burst out crying as she ran up to him;
all the other maids came up too, and covered his head and shoulders with
their kisses. Penelope came out of her room looking like Diana or Venus,
and wept as she flung her arms about her son. She kissed his forehead
and both his beautiful eyes, "Light of my eyes," she cried as she spoke
fondly to him, "so you are come home again; I made sure I was never
going to see you any more. To think of your having gone off to Pylos
without saying anything about it or obtaining my consent. But come, tell
me what you saw."

"Do not scold me, mother," answered Telemachus, "nor vex me, seeing what
a narrow escape I have had, but wash your face, change your dress, go
upstairs with your maids, and promise full and sufficient hecatombs to
all the gods if Jove will only grant us our revenge upon the suitors. I
must now go to the place of assembly to invite a stranger who has come
back with me from Pylos. I sent him on with my crew, and told Piraeus to
take him home and look after him till I could come for him myself."

She heeded her son's words, washed her face, changed her dress, and
vowed full and sufficient hecatombs to all the gods if they would only
vouchsafe her revenge upon the suitors.

Telemachus went through, and out of, the cloisters spear in hand--not
alone, for his two fleet dogs went with him. Minerva endowed him with a
presence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled at him as he went
by, and the suitors gathered round him with fair words in their mouths
and malice in their hearts; but he avoided them, and went to sit with
Mentor, Antiphus, and Halitherses, old friends of his father's house,
and they made him tell them all that had happened to him. Then Piraeus
came up with Theoclymenus, whom he had escorted through the town to the
place of assembly, whereon Telemachus at once joined them. Piraeus was
first to speak: "Telemachus," said he, "I wish you would send some of
your women to my house to take away the presents Menelaus gave you."

"We do not know, Piraeus," answered Telemachus, "what may happen. If
the suitors kill me in my own house and divide my property among them,
I would rather you had the presents than that any of those people should
get hold of them. If on the other hand I managed to kill them, I shall
be much obliged if you will kindly bring me my presents."

With these words he took Theoclymenus to his own house. When they got
there they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats, went into the
baths, and washed themselves. When the maids had washed and anointed
them, and had given them cloaks and shirts, they took their seats at
table. A maid servant then brought them water in a beautiful golden
ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands;
and she drew a clean table beside them. An upper servant brought them
bread and offered them many good things of what there was in the
house. Opposite them sat Penelope, reclining on a couch by one of the
bearing-posts of the cloister, and spinning. Then they laid their hands
on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had
enough to eat and drink Penelope said:

"Telemachus, I shall go upstairs and lie down on that sad couch, which I
have not ceased to water with my tears, from the day Ulysses set out for
Troy with the sons of Atreus. You failed, however, to make it clear to
me before the suitors came back to the house, whether or no you had been
able to hear anything about the return of your father."

"I will tell you then truth," replied her son. "We went to Pylos and saw
Nestor, who took me to his house and treated me as hospitably as though
I were a son of his own who had just returned after a long absence; so
also did his sons; but he said he had not heard a word from any
human being about Ulysses, whether he was alive or dead. He sent me,
therefore, with a chariot and horses to Menelaus. There I saw Helen, for
whose sake so many, both Argives and Trojans, were in heaven's wisdom
doomed to suffer. Menelaus asked me what it was that had brought me to
Lacedaemon, and I told him the whole truth, whereon he said, 'So, then,
these cowards would usurp a brave man's bed? A hind might as well lay
her new-born young in the lair of a lion, and then go off to feed in the
forest or in some grassy dell. The lion, when he comes back to his lair,
will make short work with the pair of them, and so will Ulysses with
these suitors. By father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, if Ulysses is still
the man that he was when he wrestled with Philomeleides in Lesbos, and
threw him so heavily that all the Greeks cheered him--if he is still
such, and were to come near these suitors, they would have a short
shrift and a sorry wedding. As regards your question, however, I will
not prevaricate nor deceive you, but what the old man of the sea told
me, so much will I tell you in full. He said he could see Ulysses on
an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymph Calypso, who was
keeping him prisoner, and he could not reach his home, for he had no
ships nor sailors to take him over the sea.' This was what Menelaus told
me, and when I had heard his story I came away; the gods then gave me a
fair wind and soon brought me safe home again."

With these words he moved the heart of Penelope. Then Theoclymenus said
to her:

"Madam, wife of Ulysses, Telemachus does not understand these things;
listen therefore to me, for I can divine them surely, and will hide
nothing from you. May Jove the king of heaven be my witness, and the
rites of hospitality, with that hearth of Ulysses to which I now come,
that Ulysses himself is even now in Ithaca, and, either going about the
country or staying in one place, is enquiring into all these evil deeds
and preparing a day of reckoning for the suitors. I saw an omen when I
was on the ship which meant this, and I told Telemachus about it."

"May it be even so," answered Penelope; "if your words come true, you
shall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see you
shall congratulate you."

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs, or
aiming with spears at a mark on the levelled ground in front of the
house, and behaving with all their old insolence. But when it was now
time for dinner, and the flock of sheep and goats had come into the town
from all the country round, {140} with their shepherds as usual, then
Medon, who was their favourite servant, and who waited upon them at
table, said, "Now then, my young masters, you have had enough sport, so
come inside that we may get dinner ready. Dinner is not a bad thing, at
dinner time."

They left their sports as he told them, and when they were within the
house, they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats inside, and then
sacrificed some sheep, goats, pigs, and a heifer, all of them fat and
well grown. {141} Thus they made ready for their meal. In the meantime
Ulysses and the swineherd were about starting for the town, and the
swineherd said, "Stranger, I suppose you still want to go to town
to-day, as my master said you were to do; for my own part I should have
liked you to stay here as a station hand, but I must do as my master
tells me, or he will scold me later on, and a scolding from one's master
is a very serious thing. Let us then be off, for it is now broad day; it
will be night again directly and then you will find it colder." {142}

"I know, and understand you," replied Ulysses; "you need say no more.
Let us be going, but if you have a stick ready cut, let me have it to
walk with, for you say the road is a very rough one."

As he spoke he threw his shabby old tattered wallet over his shoulders,
by the cord from which it hung, and Eumaeus gave him a stick to his
liking. The two then started, leaving the station in charge of the dogs
and herdsmen who remained behind; the swineherd led the way and his
master followed after, looking like some broken down old tramp as he
leaned upon his staff, and his clothes were all in rags. When they had
got over the rough steep ground and were nearing the city, they reached
the fountain from which the citizens drew their water. This had
been made by Ithacus, Neritus, and Polyctor. There was a grove of
water-loving poplars planted in a circle all round it, and the clear
cold water came down to it from a rock high up, {143} while above the
fountain there was an altar to the nymphs, at which all wayfarers used
to sacrifice. Here Melanthius son of Dolius overtook them as he was
driving down some goats, the best in his flock, for the suitors' dinner,
and there were two shepherds with him. When he saw Eumaeus and Ulysses
he reviled them with outrageous and unseemly language, which made
Ulysses very angry.

"There you go," cried he, "and a precious pair you are. See how heaven
brings birds of the same feather to one another. Where, pray, master
swineherd, are you taking this poor miserable object? It would make any
one sick to see such a creature at table. A fellow like this never won a
prize for anything in his life, but will go about rubbing his shoulders
against every man's door post, and begging, not for swords and cauldrons
{144} like a man, but only for a few scraps not worth begging for. If
you would give him to me for a hand on my station, he might do to clean
out the folds, or bring a bit of sweet feed to the kids, and he could
fatten his thighs as much as he pleased on whey; but he has taken to bad
ways and will not go about any kind of work; he will do nothing but
beg victuals all the town over, to feed his insatiable belly. I say,
therefore--and it shall surely be--if he goes near Ulysses' house he
will get his head broken by the stools they will fling at him, till they
turn him out."

On this, as he passed, he gave Ulysses a kick on the hip out of pure
wantonness, but Ulysses stood firm, and did not budge from the path. For
a moment he doubted whether or no to fly at Melanthius and kill him
with his staff, or fling him to the ground and beat his brains out;
he resolved, however, to endure it and keep himself in check, but the
swineherd looked straight at Melanthius and rebuked him, lifting up his
hands and praying to heaven as he did so.

"Fountain nymphs," he cried, "children of Jove, if ever Ulysses burned
you thigh bones covered with fat whether of lambs or kids, grant my
prayer that heaven may send him home. He would soon put an end to
the swaggering threats with which such men as you go about insulting
people--gadding all over the town while your flocks are going to ruin
through bad shepherding."

Then Melanthius the goatherd answered, "You ill conditioned cur, what
are you talking about? Some day or other I will put you on board ship
and take you to a foreign country, where I can sell you and pocket the
money you will fetch. I wish I were as sure that Apollo would strike
Telemachus dead this very day, or that the suitors would kill him, as I
am that Ulysses will never come home again."

With this he left them to come on at their leisure, while he went
quickly forward and soon reached the house of his master. When he
got there he went in and took his seat among the suitors opposite
Eurymachus, who liked him better than any of the others. The servants
brought him a portion of meat, and an upper woman servant set bread
before him that he might eat. Presently Ulysses and the swineherd came
up to the house and stood by it, amid a sound of music, for Phemius was
just beginning to sing to the suitors. Then Ulysses took hold of the
swineherd's hand, and said:

"Eumaeus, this house of Ulysses is a very fine place. No matter how far
you go, you will find few like it. One building keeps following on after
another. The outer court has a wall with battlements all round it; the
doors are double folding, and of good workmanship; it would be a hard
matter to take it by force of arms. I perceive, too, that there are many
people banqueting within it, for there is a smell of roast meat, and
I hear a sound of music, which the gods have made to go along with
feasting."

Then Eumaeus said, "You have perceived aright, as indeed you generally
do; but let us think what will be our best course. Will you go inside
first and join the suitors, leaving me here behind you, or will you wait
here and let me go in first? But do not wait long, or some one may see
you loitering about outside, and throw something at you. Consider this
matter I pray you."

And Ulysses answered, "I understand and heed. Go in first and leave
me here where I am. I am quite used to being beaten and having things
thrown at me. I have been so much buffeted about in war and by sea that
I am case-hardened, and this too may go with the rest. But a man cannot
hide away the cravings of a hungry belly; this is an enemy which gives
much trouble to all men; it is because of this that ships are fitted out
to sail the seas, and to make war upon other people."

As they were thus talking, a dog that had been lying asleep raised his
head and pricked up his ears. This was Argos, whom Ulysses had bred
before setting out for Troy, but he had never had any work out of him.
In the old days he used to be taken out by the young men when they went
hunting wild goats, or deer, or hares, but now that his master was gone
he was lying neglected on the heaps of mule and cow dung that lay in
front of the stable doors till the men should come and draw it away
to manure the great close; and he was full of fleas. As soon as he saw
Ulysses standing there, he dropped his ears and wagged his tail, but he
could not get close up to his master. When Ulysses saw the dog on the
other side of the yard, he dashed a tear from his eyes without Eumaeus
seeing it, and said:

"Eumaeus, what a noble hound that is over yonder on the manure heap: his
build is splendid; is he as fine a fellow as he looks, or is he only one
of those dogs that come begging about a table, and are kept merely for
show?"

"This hound," answered Eumaeus, "belonged to him who has died in a far
country. If he were what he was when Ulysses left for Troy, he would
soon show you what he could do. There was not a wild beast in the forest
that could get away from him when he was once on its tracks. But now he
has fallen on evil times, for his master is dead and gone, and the women
take no care of him. Servants never do their work when their master's
hand is no longer over them, for Jove takes half the goodness out of a
man when he makes a slave of him."

As he spoke he went inside the buildings to the cloister where the
suitors were, but Argos died as soon as he had recognised his master.

Telemachus saw Eumaeus long before any one else did, and beckoned him
to come and sit beside him; so he looked about and saw a seat lying
near where the carver sat serving out their portions to the suitors; he
picked it up, brought it to Telemachus's table, and sat down opposite
him. Then the servant brought him his portion, and gave him bread from
the bread-basket.

Immediately afterwards Ulysses came inside, looking like a poor
miserable old beggar, leaning on his staff and with his clothes all in
rags. He sat down upon the threshold of ash-wood just inside the doors
leading from the outer to the inner court, and against a bearing-post of
cypress-wood which the carpenter had skilfully planed, and had made to
join truly with rule and line. Telemachus took a whole loaf from the
bread-basket, with as much meat as he could hold in his two hands, and
said to Eumaeus, "Take this to the stranger, and tell him to go
the round of the suitors, and beg from them; a beggar must not be
shamefaced."

So Eumaeus went up to him and said, "Stranger, Telemachus sends you
this, and says you are to go the round of the suitors begging, for
beggars must not be shamefaced."

Ulysses answered, "May King Jove grant all happiness to Telemachus, and
fulfil the desire of his heart."

Then with both hands he took what Telemachus had sent him, and laid it
on the dirty old wallet at his feet. He went on eating it while the
bard was singing, and had just finished his dinner as he left off.
The suitors applauded the bard, whereon Minerva went up to Ulysses and
prompted him to beg pieces of bread from each one of the suitors, that
he might see what kind of people they were, and tell the good from the
bad; but come what might she was not going to save a single one of them.
Ulysses, therefore, went on his round, going from left to right, and
stretched out his hands to beg as though he were a real beggar. Some of
them pitied him, and were curious about him, asking one another who
he was and where he came from; whereon the goatherd Melanthius said,
"Suitors of my noble mistress, I can tell you something about him, for I
have seen him before. The swineherd brought him here, but I know nothing
about the man himself, nor where he comes from."

On this Antinous began to abuse the swineherd. "You precious idiot," he
cried, "what have you brought this man to town for? Have we not tramps
and beggars enough already to pester us as we sit at meat? Do you think
it a small thing that such people gather here to waste your master's
property--and must you needs bring this man as well?"

And Eumaeus answered, "Antinous, your birth is good but your words evil.
It was no doing of mine that he came here. Who is likely to invite a
stranger from a foreign country, unless it be one of those who can do
public service as a seer, a healer of hurts, a carpenter, or a bard who
can charm us with his singing? Such men are welcome all the world over,
but no one is likely to ask a beggar who will only worry him. You are
always harder on Ulysses' servants than any of the other suitors
are, and above all on me, but I do not care so long as Telemachus and
Penelope are alive and here."

But Telemachus said, "Hush, do not answer him; Antinous has the
bitterest tongue of all the suitors, and he makes the others worse."

Then turning to Antinous he said, "Antinous, you take as much care of
my interests as though I were your son. Why should you want to see this
stranger turned out of the house? Heaven forbid; take something and give
it him yourself; I do not grudge it; I bid you take it. Never mind my
mother, nor any of the other servants in the house; but I know you will
not do what I say, for you are more fond of eating things yourself than
of giving them to other people."

"What do you mean, Telemachus," replied Antinous, "by this swaggering
talk? If all the suitors were to give him as much as I will, he would
not come here again for another three months."

As he spoke he drew the stool on which he rested his dainty feet from
under the table, and made as though he would throw it at Ulysses, but
the other suitors all gave him something, and filled his wallet with
bread and meat; he was about, therefore, to go back to the threshold and
eat what the suitors had given him, but he first went up to Antinous and
said:

"Sir, give me something; you are not, surely, the poorest man here; you
seem to be a chief, foremost among them all; therefore you should be the
better giver, and I will tell far and wide of your bounty. I too was a
rich man once, and had a fine house of my own; in those days I gave to
many a tramp such as I now am, no matter who he might be nor what he
wanted. I had any number of servants, and all the other things which
people have who live well and are accounted wealthy, but it pleased Jove
to take all away from me. He sent me with a band of roving robbers to
Egypt; it was a long voyage and I was undone by it. I stationed my ships
in the river Aegyptus, and bade my men stay by them and keep guard
over them, while I sent out scouts to reconnoitre from every point of
vantage.

"But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and ravaged
the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their wives and
children captives. The alarm was soon carried to the city, and when they
heard the war-cry, the people came out at daybreak till the plain was
filled with soldiers horse and foot, and with the gleam of armour. Then
Jove spread panic among my men, and they would no longer face the enemy,
for they found themselves surrounded. The Egyptians killed many of us,
and took the rest alive to do forced labour for them; as for myself,
they gave me to a friend who met them, to take to Cyprus, Dmetor by
name, son of Iasus, who was a great man in Cyprus. Thence I am come
hither in a state of great misery."

Then Antinous said, "What god can have sent such a pestilence to plague
us during our dinner? Get out, into the open part of the court, {145}
or I will give you Egypt and Cyprus over again for your insolence and
importunity; you have begged of all the others, and they have given you
lavishly, for they have abundance round them, and it is easy to be free
with other people's property when there is plenty of it."

On this Ulysses began to move off, and said, "Your looks, my fine sir,
are better than your breeding; if you were in your own house you would
not spare a poor man so much as a pinch of salt, for though you are in
another man's, and surrounded with abundance, you cannot find it in you
to give him even a piece of bread."

This made Antinous very angry, and he scowled at him saying, "You shall
pay for this before you get clear of the court." With these words he
threw a footstool at him, and hit him on the right shoulder blade near
the top of his back. Ulysses stood firm as a rock and the blow did not
even stagger him, but he shook his head in silence as he brooded on his
revenge. Then he went back to the threshold and sat down there, laying
his well filled wallet at his feet.

"Listen to me," he cried, "you suitors of Queen Penelope, that I may
speak even as I am minded. A man knows neither ache nor pain if he gets
hit while fighting for his money, or for his sheep or his cattle; and
even so Antinous has hit me while in the service of my miserable belly,
which is always getting people into trouble. Still, if the poor have
gods and avenging deities at all, I pray them that Antinous may come to
a bad end before his marriage."

"Sit where you are, and eat your victuals in silence, or be off
elsewhere," shouted Antinous. "If you say more I will have you dragged
hand and foot through the courts, and the servants shall flay you
alive."

The other suitors were much displeased at this, and one of the young men
said, "Antinous, you did ill in striking that poor wretch of a tramp: it
will be worse for you if he should turn out to be some god--and we know
the gods go about disguised in all sorts of ways as people from foreign
countries, and travel about the world to see who do amiss and who
righteously." {146}

Thus said the suitors, but Antinous paid them no heed. Meanwhile
Telemachus was furious about the blow that had been given to his father,
and though no tear fell from him, he shook his head in silence and
brooded on his revenge.

Now when Penelope heard that the beggar had been struck in the
banqueting-cloister, she said before her maids, "Would that Apollo would
so strike you, Antinous," and her waiting woman Eurynome answered, "If
our prayers were answered not one of the suitors would ever again see
the sun rise." Then Penelope said, "Nurse, {147} I hate every single one
of them, for they mean nothing but mischief, but I hate Antinous like
the darkness of death itself. A poor unfortunate tramp has come begging
about the house for sheer want. Every one else has given him
something to put in his wallet, but Antinous has hit him on the right
shoulder-blade with a footstool."

Thus did she talk with her maids as she sat in her own room, and in
the meantime Ulysses was getting his dinner. Then she called for the
swineherd and said, "Eumaeus, go and tell the stranger to come here, I
want to see him and ask him some questions. He seems to have travelled
much, and he may have seen or heard something of my unhappy husband."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "If these Achaeans, Madam,
would only keep quiet, you would be charmed with the history of his
adventures. I had him three days and three nights with me in my hut,
which was the first place he reached after running away from his ship,
and he has not yet completed the story of his misfortunes. If he had
been the most heaven-taught minstrel in the whole world, on whose lips
all hearers hang entranced, I could not have been more charmed as I
sat in my hut and listened to him. He says there is an old friendship
between his house and that of Ulysses, and that he comes from Crete
where the descendants of Minos live, after having been driven hither and
thither by every kind of misfortune; he also declares that he has heard
of Ulysses as being alive and near at hand among the Thesprotians, and
that he is bringing great wealth home with him."

"Call him here, then," said Penelope, "that I too may hear his story.
As for the suitors, let them take their pleasure indoors or out as they
will, for they have nothing to fret about. Their corn and wine remain
unwasted in their houses with none but servants to consume them, while
they keep hanging about our house day after day sacrificing our oxen,
sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and never giving so much as
a thought to the quantity of wine they drink. No estate can stand such
recklessness, for we have now no Ulysses to protect us. If he were to
come again, he and his son would soon have their revenge."

As she spoke Telemachus sneezed so loudly that the whole house resounded
with it. Penelope laughed when she heard this, and said to Eumaeus, "Go
and call the stranger; did you not hear how my son sneezed just as I
was speaking? This can only mean that all the suitors are going to be
killed, and that not one of them shall escape. Furthermore I say, and
lay my saying to your heart: if I am satisfied that the stranger is
speaking the truth I shall give him a shirt and cloak of good wear."

When Eumaeus heard this he went straight to Ulysses and said, "Father
stranger, my mistress Penelope, mother of Telemachus, has sent for you;
she is in great grief, but she wishes to hear anything you can tell her
about her husband, and if she is satisfied that you are speaking the
truth, she will give you a shirt and cloak, which are the very things
that you are most in want of. As for bread, you can get enough of that
to fill your belly, by begging about the town, and letting those give
that will."

"I will tell Penelope," answered Ulysses, "nothing but what is strictly
true. I know all about her husband, and have been partner with him
in affliction, but I am afraid of passing through this crowd of cruel
suitors, for their pride and insolence reach heaven. Just now, moreover,
as I was going about the house without doing any harm, a man gave me
a blow that hurt me very much, but neither Telemachus nor any one else
defended me. Tell Penelope, therefore, to be patient and wait till
sundown. Let her give me a seat close up to the fire, for my clothes are
worn very thin--you know they are, for you have seen them ever since I
first asked you to help me--she can then ask me about the return of her
husband."

The swineherd went back when he heard this, and Penelope said as she saw
him cross the threshold, "Why do you not bring him here, Eumaeus? Is he
afraid that some one will ill-treat him, or is he shy of coming inside
the house at all? Beggars should not be shamefaced."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "The stranger is quite
reasonable. He is avoiding the suitors, and is only doing what any one
else would do. He asks you to wait till sundown, and it will be much
better, madam, that you should have him all to yourself, when you can
hear him and talk to him as you will."

"The man is no fool," answered Penelope, "it would very likely be as
he says, for there are no such abominable people in the whole world as
these men are."

When she had done speaking Eumaeus went back to the suitors, for he had
explained everything. Then he went up to Telemachus and said in his ear
so that none could overhear him, "My dear sir, I will now go back to the
pigs, to see after your property and my own business. You will look to
what is going on here, but above all be careful to keep out of danger,
for there are many who bear you ill will. May Jove bring them to a bad
end before they do us a mischief."

"Very well," replied Telemachus, "go home when you have had your dinner,
and in the morning come here with the victims we are to sacrifice for
the day. Leave the rest to heaven and me."

On this Eumaeus took his seat again, and when he had finished his dinner
he left the courts and the cloister with the men at table, and went
back to his pigs. As for the suitors, they presently began to amuse
themselves with singing and dancing, for it was now getting on towards
evening.


Book XVIII

THE FIGHT WITH IRUS--ULYSSES WARNS AMPHINOMUS--PENELOPE GETS PRESENTS
FROM THE SUITORS--THE BRAZIERS--ULYSSES REBUKES EURYMACHUS.

Now there came a certain common tramp who used to go begging all over
the city of Ithaca, and was notorious as an incorrigible glutton and
drunkard. This man had no strength nor stay in him, but he was a great
hulking fellow to look at; his real name, the one his mother gave him,
was Arnaeus, but the young men of the place called him Irus, {148}
because he used to run errands for any one who would send him. As soon
as he came he began to insult Ulysses, and to try and drive him out of
his own house.

"Be off, old man," he cried, "from the doorway, or you shall be dragged
out neck and heels. Do you not see that they are all giving me the wink,
and wanting me to turn you out by force, only I do not like to do so?
Get up then, and go of yourself, or we shall come to blows."

Ulysses frowned on him and said, "My friend, I do you no manner of harm;
people give you a great deal, but I am not jealous. There is room enough
in this doorway for the pair of us, and you need not grudge me things
that are not yours to give. You seem to be just such another tramp as
myself, but perhaps the gods will give us better luck by and by. Do not,
however, talk too much about fighting or you will incense me, and old
though I am, I shall cover your mouth and chest with blood. I shall
have more peace tomorrow if I do, for you will not come to the house of
Ulysses any more."

Irus was very angry and answered, "You filthy glutton, you run on
trippingly like an old fish-fag. I have a good mind to lay both hands
about you, and knock your teeth out of your head like so many boar's
tusks. Get ready, therefore, and let these people here stand by and
look on. You will never be able to fight one who is so much younger than
yourself."

Thus roundly did they rate one another on the smooth pavement in front
of the doorway, {149} and when Antinous saw what was going on he laughed
heartily and said to the others, "This is the finest sport that you
ever saw; heaven never yet sent anything like it into this house. The
stranger and Irus have quarreled and are going to fight, let us set them
on to do so at once."

The suitors all came up laughing, and gathered round the two ragged
tramps. "Listen to me," said Antinous, "there are some goats' paunches
down at the fire, which we have filled with blood and fat, and set aside
for supper; he who is victorious and proves himself to be the better
man shall have his pick of the lot; he shall be free of our table and we
will not allow any other beggar about the house at all."

The others all agreed, but Ulysses, to throw them off the scent, said,
"Sirs, an old man like myself, worn out with suffering, cannot hold his
own against a young one; but my irrepressible belly urges me on, though
I know it can only end in my getting a drubbing. You must swear, however
that none of you will give me a foul blow to favour Irus and secure him
the victory."

They swore as he told them, and when they had completed their oath
Telemachus put in a word and said, "Stranger, if you have a mind to
settle with this fellow, you need not be afraid of any one here. Whoever
strikes you will have to fight more than one. I am host, and the other
chiefs, Antinous and Eurymachus, both of them men of understanding, are
of the same mind as I am."

Every one assented, and Ulysses girded his old rags about his loins,
thus baring his stalwart thighs, his broad chest and shoulders, and his
mighty arms; but Minerva came up to him and made his limbs even stronger
still. The suitors were beyond measure astonished, and one would turn
towards his neighbour saying, "The stranger has brought such a thigh out
of his old rags that there will soon be nothing left of Irus."

Irus began to be very uneasy as he heard them, but the servants girded
him by force, and brought him [into the open part of the court] in such
a fright that his limbs were all of a tremble. Antinous scolded him and
said, "You swaggering bully, you ought never to have been born at all if
you are afraid of such an old broken down creature as this tramp is.
I say, therefore--and it shall surely be--if he beats you and proves
himself the better man, I shall pack you off on board ship to the
mainland and send you to king Echetus, who kills every one that comes
near him. He will cut off your nose and ears, and draw out your entrails
for the dogs to eat."

This frightened Irus still more, but they brought him into the middle
of the court, and the two men raised their hands to fight. Then Ulysses
considered whether he should let drive so hard at him as to make an end
of him then and there, or whether he should give him a lighter blow that
should only knock him down; in the end he deemed it best to give the
lighter blow for fear the Achaeans should begin to suspect who he was.
Then they began to fight, and Irus hit Ulysses on the right shoulder;
but Ulysses gave Irus a blow on the neck under the ear that broke in the
bones of his skull, and the blood came gushing out of his mouth; he fell
groaning in the dust, gnashing his teeth and kicking on the ground, but
the suitors threw up their hands and nearly died of laughter, as Ulysses
caught hold of him by the foot and dragged him into the outer court as
far as the gate-house. There he propped him up against the wall and put
his staff in his hands. "Sit here," said he, "and keep the dogs and pigs
off; you are a pitiful creature, and if you try to make yourself king of
the beggars any more you shall fare still worse."

Then he threw his dirty old wallet, all tattered and torn over his
shoulder with the cord by which it hung, and went back to sit down upon
the threshold; but the suitors went within the cloisters, laughing and
saluting him, "May Jove, and all the other gods," said they, "grant
you whatever you want for having put an end to the importunity of this
insatiable tramp. We will take him over to the mainland presently, to
king Echetus, who kills every one that comes near him."

Ulysses hailed this as of good omen, and Antinous set a great goat's
paunch before him filled with blood and fat. Amphinomus took two loaves
out of the bread-basket and brought them to him, pledging him as he
did so in a golden goblet of wine. "Good luck to you," he said, "father
stranger, you are very badly off at present, but I hope you will have
better times by and by."

To this Ulysses answered, "Amphinomus, you seem to be a man of good
understanding, as indeed you may well be, seeing whose son you are. I
have heard your father well spoken of; he is Nisus of Dulichium, a man
both brave and wealthy. They tell me you are his son, and you appear to
be a considerable person; listen, therefore, and take heed to what I am
saying. Man is the vainest of all creatures that have their being upon
earth. As long as heaven vouchsafes him health and strength, he thinks
that he shall come to no harm hereafter, and even when the blessed gods
bring sorrow upon him, he bears it as he needs must, and makes the best
of it; for God almighty gives men their daily minds day by day. I know
all about it, for I was a rich man once, and did much wrong in the
stubbornness of my pride, and in the confidence that my father and my
brothers would support me; therefore let a man fear God in all things
always, and take the good that heaven may see fit to send him without
vain glory. Consider the infamy of what these suitors are doing; see how
they are wasting the estate, and doing dishonour to the wife, of one who
is certain to return some day, and that, too, not long hence. Nay, he
will be here soon; may heaven send you home quietly first that you may
not meet with him in the day of his coming, for once he is here the
suitors and he will not part bloodlessly."

With these words he made a drink-offering, and when he had drunk he put
the gold cup again into the hands of Amphinomus, who walked away serious
and bowing his head, for he foreboded evil. But even so he did not
escape destruction, for Minerva had doomed him to fall by the hand of
Telemachus. So he took his seat again at the place from which he had
come.

Then Minerva put it into the mind of Penelope to show herself to the
suitors, that she might make them still more enamoured of her, and win
still further honour from her son and husband. So she feigned a mocking
laugh and said, "Eurynome, I have changed my mind, and have a fancy to
show myself to the suitors although I detest them. I should like also to
give my son a hint that he had better not have anything more to do with
them. They speak fairly enough but they mean mischief."

"My dear child," answered Eurynome, "all that you have said is true,
go and tell your son about it, but first wash yourself and anoint your
face. Do not go about with your cheeks all covered with tears; it is not
right that you should grieve so incessantly; for Telemachus, whom you
always prayed that you might live to see with a beard, is already grown
up."

"I know, Eurynome," replied Penelope, "that you mean well, but do not
try and persuade me to wash and to anoint myself, for heaven robbed
me of all my beauty on the day my husband sailed; nevertheless, tell
Autonoe and Hippodamia that I want them. They must be with me when I
am in the cloister; I am not going among the men alone; it would not be
proper for me to do so."

On this the old woman {150} went out of the room to bid the maids go to
their mistress. In the meantime Minerva bethought her of another matter,
and sent Penelope off into a sweet slumber; so she lay down on her couch
and her limbs became heavy with sleep. Then the goddess shed grace and
beauty over her that all the Achaeans might admire her. She washed
her face with the ambrosial loveliness that Venus wears when she goes
dancing with the Graces; she made her taller and of a more commanding
figure, while as for her complexion it was whiter than sawn ivory. When
Minerva had done all this she went away, whereon the maids came in from
the women's room and woke Penelope with the sound of their talking.

"What an exquisitely delicious sleep I have been having," said she, as
she passed her hands over her face, "in spite of all my misery. I wish
Diana would let me die so sweetly now at this very moment, that I
might no longer waste in despair for the loss of my dear husband, who
possessed every kind of good quality and was the most distinguished man
among the Achaeans."

With these words she came down from her upper room, not alone but
attended by two of her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she
stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister,
holding a veil before her face, and with a staid maid servant on either
side of her. As they beheld her the suitors were so overpowered and
became so desperately enamoured of her, that each one prayed he might
win her for his own bed fellow.

"Telemachus," said she, addressing her son, "I fear you are no longer so
discreet and well conducted as you used to be. When you were younger you
had a greater sense of propriety; now, however, that you are grown up,
though a stranger to look at you would take you for the son of a well to
do father as far as size and good looks go, your conduct is by no means
what it should be. What is all this disturbance that has been going on,
and how came you to allow a stranger to be so disgracefully ill-treated?
What would have happened if he had suffered serious injury while a
suppliant in our house? Surely this would have been very discreditable
to you."

"I am not surprised, my dear mother, at your displeasure," replied
Telemachus, "I understand all about it and know when things are not
as they should be, which I could not do when I was younger; I cannot,
however, behave with perfect propriety at all times. First one and then
another of these wicked people here keeps driving me out of my mind,
and I have no one to stand by me. After all, however, this fight between
Irus and the stranger did not turn out as the suitors meant it to do,
for the stranger got the best of it. I wish Father Jove, Minerva, and
Apollo would break the neck of every one of these wooers of yours, some
inside the house and some out; and I wish they might all be as limp as
Irus is over yonder in the gate of the outer court. See how he nods
his head like a drunken man; he has had such a thrashing that he cannot
stand on his feet nor get back to his home, wherever that may be, for he
has no strength left in him."

Thus did they converse. Eurymachus then came up and said, "Queen
Penelope, daughter of Icarius, if all the Achaeans in Iasian Argos could
see you at this moment, you would have still more suitors in your house
by tomorrow morning, for you are the most admirable woman in the whole
world both as regards personal beauty and strength of understanding."

To this Penelope replied, "Eurymachus, heaven robbed me of all my beauty
whether of face or figure when the Argives set sail for Troy and my dear
husband with them. If he were to return and look after my affairs, I
should both be more respected and show a better presence to the world.
As it is, I am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions which
heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. My husband foresaw it all, and when
he was leaving home he took my right wrist in his hand--'Wife,' he said,
'we shall not all of us come safe home from Troy, for the Trojans fight
well both with bow and spear. They are excellent also at fighting from
chariots, and nothing decides the issue of a fight sooner than this. I
know not, therefore, whether heaven will send me back to you, or whether
I may not fall over there at Troy. In the meantime do you look after
things here. Take care of my father and mother as at present, and even
more so during my absence, but when you see our son growing a beard,
then marry whom you will, and leave this your present home.' This is
what he said and now it is all coming true. A night will come when I
shall have to yield myself to a marriage which I detest, for Jove has
taken from me all hope of happiness. This further grief, moreover, cuts
me to the very heart. You suitors are not wooing me after the custom of
my country. When men are courting a woman who they think will be a good
wife to them and who is of noble birth, and when they are each trying
to win her for himself, they usually bring oxen and sheep to feast the
friends of the lady, and they make her magnificent presents, instead of
eating up other people's property without paying for it."

This was what she said, and Ulysses was glad when he heard her trying
to get presents out of the suitors, and flattering them with fair words
which he knew she did not mean.

Then Antinous said, "Queen Penelope, daughter of Icarius, take as many
presents as you please from any one who will give them to you; it is not
well to refuse a present; but we will not go about our business nor stir
from where we are, till you have married the best man among us whoever
he may be."

The others applauded what Antinous had said, and each one sent his
servant to bring his present. Antinous's man returned with a large and
lovely dress most exquisitely embroidered. It had twelve beautifully
made brooch pins of pure gold with which to fasten it. Eurymachus
immediately brought her a magnificent chain of gold and amber beads that
gleamed like sunlight. Eurydamas's two men returned with some
earrings fashioned into three brilliant pendants which glistened most
beautifully; while king Pisander son of Polyctor gave her a necklace
of the rarest workmanship, and every one else brought her a beautiful
present of some kind.

Then the queen went back to her room upstairs, and her maids brought the
presents after her. Meanwhile the suitors took to singing and dancing,
and stayed till evening came. They danced and sang till it grew dark;
they then brought in three braziers {151} to give light, and piled them
up with chopped firewood very old and dry, and they lit torches from
them, which the maids held up turn and turn about. Then Ulysses said:

"Maids, servants of Ulysses who has so long been absent, go to the queen
inside the house; sit with her and amuse her, or spin, and pick wool.
I will hold the light for all these people. They may stay till morning,
but shall not beat me, for I can stand a great deal."

The maids looked at one another and laughed, while pretty Melantho began
to gibe at him contemptuously. She was daughter to Dolius, but had been
brought up by Penelope, who used to give her toys to play with, and
looked after her when she was a child; but in spite of all this she
showed no consideration for the sorrows of her mistress, and used to
misconduct herself with Eurymachus, with whom she was in love.

"Poor wretch," said she, "are you gone clean out of your mind? Go and
sleep in some smithy, or place of public gossips, instead of chattering
here. Are you not ashamed of opening your mouth before your betters--so
many of them too? Has the wine been getting into your head, or do you
always babble in this way? You seem to have lost your wits because you
beat the tramp Irus; take care that a better man than he does not come
and cudgel you about the head till he pack you bleeding out of the
house."

"Vixen," replied Ulysses, scowling at her, "I will go and tell
Telemachus what you have been saying, and he will have you torn limb
from limb."

With these words he scared the women, and they went off into the body
of the house. They trembled all over, for they thought he would do as he
said. But Ulysses took his stand near the burning braziers, holding up
torches and looking at the people--brooding the while on things that
should surely come to pass.

But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment cease their
insolence, for she wanted Ulysses to become even more bitter against
them; she therefore set Eurymachus son of Polybus on to gibe at him,
which made the others laugh. "Listen to me," said he, "you suitors of
Queen Penelope, that I may speak even as I am minded. It is not for
nothing that this man has come to the house of Ulysses; I believe the
light has not been coming from the torches, but from his own head--for
his hair is all gone, every bit of it."

Then turning to Ulysses he said, "Stranger, will you work as a servant,
if I send you to the wolds and see that you are well paid? Can you build
a stone fence, or plant trees? I will have you fed all the year round,
and will find you in shoes and clothing. Will you go, then? Not you; for
you have got into bad ways, and do not want to work; you had rather fill
your belly by going round the country begging."

"Eurymachus," answered Ulysses, "if you and I were to work one against
the other in early summer when the days are at their longest--give me a
good scythe, and take another yourself, and let us see which will last
the longer or mow the stronger, from dawn till dark when the mowing
grass is about. Or if you will plough against me, let us each take a
yoke of tawny oxen, well-mated and of great strength and endurance:
turn me into a four acre field, and see whether you or I can drive the
straighter furrow. If, again, war were to break out this day, give me
a shield, a couple of spears and a helmet fitting well upon my
temples--you would find me foremost in the fray, and would cease your
gibes about my belly. You are insolent and cruel, and think yourself
a great man because you live in a little world, and that a bad one. If
Ulysses comes to his own again, the doors of his house are wide, but you
will find them narrow when you try to fly through them."

Eurymachus was furious at all this. He scowled at him and cried, "You
wretch, I will soon pay you out for daring to say such things to me, and
in public too. Has the wine been getting into your head or do you always
babble in this way? You seem to have lost your wits because you beat the
tramp Irus." With this he caught hold of a footstool, but Ulysses sought
protection at the knees of Amphinomus of Dulichium, for he was afraid.
The stool hit the cupbearer on his right hand and knocked him down: the
man fell with a cry flat on his back, and his wine-jug fell ringing to
the ground. The suitors in the covered cloister were now in an uproar,
and one would turn towards his neighbour, saying, "I wish the stranger
had gone somewhere else, bad luck to him, for all the trouble he gives
us. We cannot permit such disturbance about a beggar; if such ill
counsels are to prevail we shall have no more pleasure at our banquet."

On this Telemachus came forward and said, "Sirs, are you mad? Can you
not carry your meat and your liquor decently? Some evil spirit has
possessed you. I do not wish to drive any of you away, but you have had
your suppers, and the sooner you all go home to bed the better."

The suitors bit their lips and marvelled at the boldness of his speech;
but Amphinomus the son of Nisus, who was son to Aretias, said, "Do not
let us take offence; it is reasonable, so let us make no answer. Neither
let us do violence to the stranger nor to any of Ulysses' servants. Let
the cupbearer go round with the drink-offerings, that we may make them
and go home to our rest. As for the stranger, let us leave Telemachus to
deal with him, for it is to his house that he has come."

Thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well, so Mulius of
Dulichium, servant to Amphinomus, mixed them a bowl of wine and water
and handed it round to each of them man by man, whereon they made their
drink-offerings to the blessed gods: Then, when they had made their
drink-offerings and had drunk each one as he was minded, they took their
several ways each of them to his own abode.


Book XIX

TELEMACHUS AND ULYSSES REMOVE THE ARMOUR--ULYSSES INTERVIEWS
PENELOPE--EURYCLEA WASHES HIS FEET AND RECOGNISES THE SCAR ON HIS
LEG--PENELOPE TELLS HER DREAM TO ULYSSES.

Ulysses was left in the cloister, pondering on the means whereby with
Minerva's help he might be able to kill the suitors. Presently he said
to Telemachus, "Telemachus, we must get the armour together and take
it down inside. Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you have
removed it. Say that you have taken it to be out of the way of the
smoke, inasmuch as it is no longer what it was when Ulysses went
away, but has become soiled and begrimed with soot. Add to this more
particularly that you are afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel over
their wine, and that they may do each other some harm which may disgrace
both banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people
to use them."

Telemachus approved of what his father had said, so he called nurse
Euryclea and said, "Nurse, shut the women up in their room, while I take
the armour that my father left behind him down into the store room. No
one looks after it now my father is gone, and it has got all smirched
with soot during my own boyhood. I want to take it down where the smoke
cannot reach it."

"I wish, child," answered Euryclea, "that you would take the management
of the house into your own hands altogether, and look after all the
property yourself. But who is to go with you and light you to the
store-room? The maids would have done so, but you would not let them."

"The stranger," said Telemachus, "shall show me a light; when people eat
my bread they must earn it, no matter where they come from."

Euryclea did as she was told, and bolted the women inside their room.
Then Ulysses and his son made all haste to take the helmets, shields,
and spears inside; and Minerva went before them with a gold lamp in her
hand that shed a soft and brilliant radiance, whereon Telemachus said,
"Father, my eyes behold a great marvel: the walls, with the rafters,
crossbeams, and the supports on which they rest are all aglow as with
a flaming fire. Surely there is some god here who has come down from
heaven."

"Hush," answered Ulysses, "hold your peace and ask no questions, for
this is the manner of the gods. Get you to your bed, and leave me here
to talk with your mother and the maids. Your mother in her grief will
ask me all sorts of questions."

On this Telemachus went by torch-light to the other side of the inner
court, to the room in which he always slept. There he lay in his bed
till morning, while Ulysses was left in the cloister pondering on the
means whereby with Minerva's help he might be able to kill the suitors.

Then Penelope came down from her room looking like Venus or Diana, and
they set her a seat inlaid with scrolls of silver and ivory near the
fire in her accustomed place. It had been made by Icmalius and had a
footstool all in one piece with the seat itself; and it was covered with
a thick fleece: on this she now sat, and the maids came from the women's
room to join her. They set about removing the tables at which the wicked
suitors had been dining, and took away the bread that was left, with
the cups from which they had drunk. They emptied the embers out of the
braziers, and heaped much wood upon them to give both light and heat;
but Melantho began to rail at Ulysses a second time and said, "Stranger,
do you mean to plague us by hanging about the house all night and spying
upon the women? Be off, you wretch, outside, and eat your supper there,
or you shall be driven out with a firebrand."

Ulysses scowled at her and answered, "My good woman, why should you be
so angry with me? Is it because I am not clean, and my clothes are all
in rags, and because I am obliged to go begging about after the manner
of tramps and beggars generally? I too was a rich man once, and had a
fine house of my own; in those days I gave to many a tramp such as I now
am, no matter who he might be nor what he wanted. I had any number of
servants, and all the other things which people have who live well and
are accounted wealthy, but it pleased Jove to take all away from me;
therefore, woman, beware lest you too come to lose that pride and place
in which you now wanton above your fellows; have a care lest you get
out of favour with your mistress, and lest Ulysses should come home, for
there is still a chance that he may do so. Moreover, though he be dead
as you think he is, yet by Apollo's will he has left a son behind him,
Telemachus, who will note anything done amiss by the maids in the house,
for he is now no longer in his boyhood."

Penelope heard what he was saying and scolded the maid, "Impudent
baggage," said she, "I see how abominably you are behaving, and you
shall smart for it. You knew perfectly well, for I told you myself, that
I was going to see the stranger and ask him about my husband, for whose
sake I am in such continual sorrow."

Then she said to her head waiting woman Eurynome, "Bring a seat with a
fleece upon it, for the stranger to sit upon while he tells his story,
and listens to what I have to say. I wish to ask him some questions."

Eurynome brought the seat at once and set a fleece upon it, and as soon
as Ulysses had sat down Penelope began by saying, "Stranger, I shall
first ask you who and whence are you? Tell me of your town and parents."

"Madam," answered Ulysses, "who on the face of the whole earth can dare
to chide with you? Your fame reaches the firmament of heaven itself; you
are like some blameless king, who upholds righteousness, as the monarch
over a great and valiant nation: the earth yields its wheat and barley,
the trees are loaded with fruit, the ewes bring forth lambs, and the sea
abounds with fish by reason of his virtues, and his people do good deeds
under him. Nevertheless, as I sit here in your house, ask me some other
question and do not seek to know my race and family, or you will recall
memories that will yet more increase my sorrow. I am full of heaviness,
but I ought not to sit weeping and wailing in another person's house,
nor is it well to be thus grieving continually. I shall have one of the
servants or even yourself complaining of me, and saying that my eyes
swim with tears because I am heavy with wine."

Then Penelope answered, "Stranger, heaven robbed me of all beauty,
whether of face or figure, when the Argives set sail for Troy and my
dear husband with them. If he were to return and look after my affairs
I should be both more respected and should show a better presence to
the world. As it is, I am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions
which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. The chiefs from all our
islands--Dulichium, Same, and Zacynthus, as also from Ithaca itself,
are wooing me against my will and are wasting my estate. I can therefore
show no attention to strangers, nor suppliants, nor to people who say
that they are skilled artisans, but am all the time broken-hearted
about Ulysses. They want me to marry again at once, and I have to invent
stratagems in order to deceive them. In the first place heaven put it in
my mind to set up a great tambour-frame in my room, and to begin
working upon an enormous piece of fine needlework. Then I said to them,
'Sweethearts, Ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press me to marry
again immediately; wait--for I would not have my skill in needlework
perish unrecorded--till I have finished making a pall for the hero
Laertes, to be ready against the time when death shall take him. He
is very rich, and the women of the place will talk if he is laid out
without a pall.' This was what I said, and they assented; whereon I
used to keep working at my great web all day long, but at night I would
unpick the stitches again by torch light. I fooled them in this way for
three years without their finding it out, but as time wore on and I was
now in my fourth year, in the waning of moons, and many days had been
accomplished, those good for nothing hussies my maids betrayed me to the
suitors, who broke in upon me and caught me; they were very angry with
me, so I was forced to finish my work whether I would or no. And now
I do not see how I can find any further shift for getting out of this
marriage. My parents are putting great pressure upon me, and my son
chafes at the ravages the suitors are making upon his estate, for he is
now old enough to understand all about it and is perfectly able to look
after his own affairs, for heaven has blessed him with an excellent
disposition. Still, notwithstanding all this, tell me who you are and
where you come from--for you must have had father and mother of some
sort; you cannot be the son of an oak or of a rock."

Then Ulysses answered, "Madam, wife of Ulysses, since you persist in
asking me about my family, I will answer, no matter what it costs me:
people must expect to be pained when they have been exiles as long as
I have, and suffered as much among as many peoples. Nevertheless, as
regards your question I will tell you all you ask. There is a fair and
fruitful island in mid-ocean called Crete; it is thickly peopled and
there are ninety cities in it: the people speak many different languages
which overlap one another, for there are Achaeans, brave Eteocretans,
Dorians of three-fold race, and noble Pelasgi. There is a great
town there, Cnossus, where Minos reigned who every nine years had a
conference with Jove himself. {152} Minos was father to Deucalion, whose
son I am, for Deucalion had two sons Idomeneus and myself. Idomeneus
sailed for Troy, and I, who am the younger, am called Aethon; my
brother, however, was at once the older and the more valiant of the two;
hence it was in Crete that I saw Ulysses and showed him hospitality, for
the winds took him there as he was on his way to Troy, carrying him out
of his course from cape Malea and leaving him in Amnisus off the cave of
Ilithuia, where the harbours are difficult to enter and he could hardly
find shelter from the winds that were then raging. As soon as he got
there he went into the town and asked for Idomeneus, claiming to be his
old and valued friend, but Idomeneus had already set sail for Troy some
ten or twelve days earlier, so I took him to my own house and showed him
every kind of hospitality, for I had abundance of everything. Moreover,
I fed the men who were with him with barley meal from the public store,
and got subscriptions of wine and oxen for them to sacrifice to their
heart's content. They stayed with me twelve days, for there was a gale
blowing from the North so strong that one could hardly keep one's feet
on land. I suppose some unfriendly god had raised it for them, but on
the thirteenth day the wind dropped, and they got away."

Many a plausible tale did Ulysses further tell her, and Penelope wept
as she listened, for her heart was melted. As the snow wastes upon the
mountain tops when the winds from South East and West have breathed upon
it and thawed it till the rivers run bank full with water, even so did
her cheeks overflow with tears for the husband who was all the time
sitting by her side. Ulysses felt for her and was sorry for her, but he
kept his eyes as hard as horn or iron without letting them so much
as quiver, so cunningly did he restrain his tears. Then, when she had
relieved herself by weeping, she turned to him again and said: "Now,
stranger, I shall put you to the test and see whether or no you really
did entertain my husband and his men, as you say you did. Tell me, then,
how he was dressed, what kind of a man he was to look at, and so also
with his companions."

"Madam," answered Ulysses, "it is such a long time ago that I can hardly
say. Twenty years are come and gone since he left my home, and went
elsewhither; but I will tell you as well as I can recollect. Ulysses
wore a mantle of purple wool, double lined, and it was fastened by a
gold brooch with two catches for the pin. On the face of this there was
a device that shewed a dog holding a spotted fawn between his fore paws,
and watching it as it lay panting upon the ground. Every one marvelled
at the way in which these things had been done in gold, the dog
looking at the fawn, and strangling it, while the fawn was struggling
convulsively to escape. {153} As for the shirt that he wore next his
skin, it was so soft that it fitted him like the skin of an onion, and
glistened in the sunlight to the admiration of all the women who beheld
it. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart, that I do not
know whether Ulysses wore these clothes when he left home, or whether
one of his companions had given them to him while he was on his voyage;
or possibly some one at whose house he was staying made him a present
of them, for he was a man of many friends and had few equals among the
Achaeans. I myself gave him a sword of bronze and a beautiful purple
mantle, double lined, with a shirt that went down to his feet, and I
sent him on board his ship with every mark of honour. He had a servant
with him, a little older than himself, and I can tell you what he was
like; his shoulders were hunched, {154} he was dark, and he had thick
curly hair. His name was Eurybates, and Ulysses treated him with greater
familiarity than he did any of the others, as being the most like-minded
with himself."

Penelope was moved still more deeply as she heard the indisputable
proofs that Ulysses laid before her; and when she had again found relief
in tears she said to him, "Stranger, I was already disposed to pity you,
but henceforth you shall be honoured and made welcome in my house. It
was I who gave Ulysses the clothes you speak of. I took them out of
the store room and folded them up myself, and I gave him also the gold
brooch to wear as an ornament. Alas! I shall never welcome him home
again. It was by an ill fate that he ever set out for that detested city
whose very name I cannot bring myself even to mention."

Then Ulysses answered, "Madam, wife of Ulysses, do not disfigure
yourself further by grieving thus bitterly for your loss, though I can
hardly blame you for doing so. A woman who has loved her husband and
borne him children, would naturally be grieved at losing him, even
though he were a worse man than Ulysses, who they say was like a god.
Still, cease your tears and listen to what I can tell you. I will hide
nothing from you, and can say with perfect truth that I have lately
heard of Ulysses as being alive and on his way home; he is among the
Thesprotians, and is bringing back much valuable treasure that he has
begged from one and another of them; but his ship and all his crew
were lost as they were leaving the Thrinacian island, for Jove and
the sun-god were angry with him because his men had slaughtered the
sun-god's cattle, and they were all drowned to a man. But Ulysses
stuck to the keel of the ship and was drifted on to the land of the
Phaeacians, who are near of kin to the immortals, and who treated him
as though he had been a god, giving him many presents, and wishing to
escort him home safe and sound. In fact Ulysses would have been here
long ago, had he not thought better to go from land to land gathering
wealth; for there is no man living who is so wily as he is; there is no
one can compare with him. Pheidon king of the Thesprotians told me all
this, and he swore to me--making drink-offerings in his house as he did
so--that the ship was by the water side and the crew found who would
take Ulysses to his own country. He sent me off first, for there
happened to be a Thesprotian ship sailing for the wheat-growing
island of Dulichium, but he showed me all the treasure Ulysses had got
together, and he had enough lying in the house of king Pheidon to keep
his family for ten generations; but the king said Ulysses had gone to
Dodona that he might learn Jove's mind from the high oak tree, and know
whether after so long an absence he should return to Ithaca openly or in
secret. So you may know he is safe and will be here shortly; he is close
at hand and cannot remain away from home much longer; nevertheless I
will confirm my words with an oath, and call Jove who is the first and
mightiest of all gods to witness, as also that hearth of Ulysses to
which I have now come, that all I have spoken shall surely come to pass.
Ulysses will return in this self same year; with the end of this moon
and the beginning of the next he will be here."

"May it be even so," answered Penelope; "if your words come true you
shall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see you
shall congratulate you; but I know very well how it will be. Ulysses
will not return, neither will you get your escort hence, for so surely
as that Ulysses ever was, there are now no longer any such masters in
the house as he was, to receive honourable strangers or to further them
on their way home. And now, you maids, wash his feet for him, and make
him a bed on a couch with rugs and blankets, that he may be warm and
quiet till morning. Then, at day break wash him and anoint him again,
that he may sit in the cloister and take his meals with Telemachus. It
shall be the worse for any one of these hateful people who is uncivil to
him; like it or not, he shall have no more to do in this house. For how,
sir, shall you be able to learn whether or no I am superior to others of
my sex both in goodness of heart and understanding, if I let you dine in
my cloisters squalid and ill clad? Men live but for a little season; if
they are hard, and deal hardly, people wish them ill so long as they are
alive, and speak contemptuously of them when they are dead, but he that
is righteous and deals righteously, the people tell of his praise among
all lands, and many shall call him blessed."

Ulysses answered, "Madam, I have foresworn rugs and blankets from the
day that I left the snowy ranges of Crete to go on shipboard. I will
lie as I have lain on many a sleepless night hitherto. Night after night
have I passed in any rough sleeping place, and waited for morning. Nor,
again, do I like having my feet washed; I shall not let any of the young
hussies about your house touch my feet; but, if you have any old and
respectable woman who has gone through as much trouble as I have, I will
allow her to wash them."

To this Penelope said, "My dear sir, of all the guests who ever yet
came to my house there never was one who spoke in all things with such
admirable propriety as you do. There happens to be in the house a most
respectable old woman--the same who received my poor dear husband in
her arms the night he was born, and nursed him in infancy. She is
very feeble now, but she shall wash your feet." "Come here," said she,
"Euryclea, and wash your master's age-mate; I suppose Ulysses' hands and
feet are very much the same now as his are, for trouble ages all of us
dreadfully fast."

On these words the old woman covered her face with her hands; she began
to weep and made lamentation saying, "My dear child, I cannot think
whatever I am to do with you. I am certain no one was ever more
god-fearing than yourself, and yet Jove hates you. No one in the whole
world ever burned him more thigh bones, nor gave him finer hecatombs
when you prayed you might come to a green old age yourself and see your
son grow up to take after you: yet see how he has prevented you alone
from ever getting back to your own home. I have no doubt the women in
some foreign palace which Ulysses has got to are gibing at him as all
these sluts here have been gibing at you. I do not wonder at your
not choosing to let them wash you after the manner in which they have
insulted you; I will wash your feet myself gladly enough, as Penelope
has said that I am to do so; I will wash them both for Penelope's
sake and for your own, for you have raised the most lively feelings of
compassion in my mind; and let me say this moreover, which pray attend
to; we have had all kinds of strangers in distress come here before now,
but I make bold to say that no one ever yet came who was so like Ulysses
in figure, voice, and feet as you are."

"Those who have seen us both," answered Ulysses, "have always said we
were wonderfully like each other, and now you have noticed it too."

Then the old woman took the cauldron in which she was going to wash his
feet, and poured plenty of cold water into it, adding hot till the bath
was warm enough. Ulysses sat by the fire, but ere long he turned away
from the light, for it occurred to him that when the old woman had hold
of his leg she would recognise a certain scar which it bore, whereon the
whole truth would come out. And indeed as soon as she began washing her
master, she at once knew the scar as one that had been given him by
a wild boar when he was hunting on Mt. Parnassus with his excellent
grandfather Autolycus--who was the most accomplished thief and perjurer
in the whole world--and with the sons of Autolycus. Mercury himself had
endowed him with this gift, for he used to burn the thigh bones of goats
and kids to him, so he took pleasure in his companionship. It happened
once that Autolycus had gone to Ithaca and had found the child of his
daughter just born. As soon as he had done supper Euryclea set the
infant upon his knees and said, "Autolycus, you must find a name for
your grandson; you greatly wished that you might have one."

"Son-in-law and daughter," replied Autolycus, "call the child thus: I
am highly displeased with a large number of people in one place and
another, both men and women; so name the child 'Ulysses,' or the child
of anger. When he grows up and comes to visit his mother's family on Mt.
Parnassus, where my possessions lie, I will make him a present and will
send him on his way rejoicing."

Ulysses, therefore, went to Parnassus to get the presents from
Autolycus, who with his sons shook hands with him and gave him welcome.
His grandmother Amphithea threw her arms about him, and kissed his head,
and both his beautiful eyes, while Autolycus desired his sons to get
dinner ready, and they did as he told them. They brought in a five year
old bull, flayed it, made it ready and divided it into joints; these
they then cut carefully up into smaller pieces and spitted them; they
roasted them sufficiently and served the portions round. Thus through
the livelong day to the going down of the sun they feasted, and every
man had his full share so that all were satisfied; but when the sun set
and it came on dark, they went to bed and enjoyed the boon of sleep.

When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the sons of
Autolycus went out with their hounds hunting, and Ulysses went too.
They climbed the wooded slopes of Parnassus and soon reached its breezy
upland valleys; but as the sun was beginning to beat upon the fields,
fresh-risen from the slow still currents of Oceanus, they came to a
mountain dell. The dogs were in front searching for the tracks of the
beast they were chasing, and after them came the sons of Autolycus,
among whom was Ulysses, close behind the dogs, and he had a long
spear in his hand. Here was the lair of a huge boar among some thick
brushwood, so dense that the wind and rain could not get through it, nor
could the sun's rays pierce it, and the ground underneath lay thick
with fallen leaves. The boar heard the noise of the men's feet, and the
hounds baying on every side as the huntsmen came up to him, so he rushed
from his lair, raised the bristles on his neck, and stood at bay with
fire flashing from his eyes. Ulysses was the first to raise his spear
and try to drive it into the brute, but the boar was too quick for him,
and charged him sideways, ripping him above the knee with a gash that
tore deep though it did not reach the bone. As for the boar, Ulysses hit
him on the right shoulder, and the point of the spear went right through
him, so that he fell groaning in the dust until the life went out of
him. The sons of Autolycus busied themselves with the carcass of the
boar, and bound Ulysses' wound; then, after saying a spell to stop the
bleeding, they went home as fast as they could. But when Autolycus and
his sons had thoroughly healed Ulysses, they made him some splendid
presents, and sent him back to Ithaca with much mutual good will. When
he got back, his father and mother were rejoiced to see him, and asked
him all about it, and how he had hurt himself to get the scar; so he
told them how the boar had ripped him when he was out hunting with
Autolycus and his sons on Mt. Parnassus.

As soon as Euryclea had got the scarred limb in her hands and had well
hold of it, she recognised it and dropped the foot at once. The leg fell
into the bath, which rang out and was overturned, so that all the water
was spilt on the ground; Euryclea's eyes between her joy and her grief
filled with tears, and she could not speak, but she caught Ulysses
by the beard and said, "My dear child, I am sure you must be Ulysses
himself, only I did not know you till I had actually touched and handled
you."

As she spoke she looked towards Penelope, as though wanting to tell her
that her dear husband was in the house, but Penelope was unable to
look in that direction and observe what was going on, for Minerva had
diverted her attention; so Ulysses caught Euryclea by the throat with
his right hand and with his left drew her close to him, and said,
"Nurse, do you wish to be the ruin of me, you who nursed me at your own
breast, now that after twenty years of wandering I am at last come to
my own home again? Since it has been borne in upon you by heaven to
recognise me, hold your tongue, and do not say a word about it to any
one else in the house, for if you do I tell you--and it shall surely
be--that if heaven grants me to take the lives of these suitors, I will
not spare you, though you are my own nurse, when I am killing the other
women."

"My child," answered Euryclea, "what are you talking about? You know
very well that nothing can either bend or break me. I will hold my
tongue like a stone or a piece of iron; furthermore let me say, and lay
my saying to your heart, when heaven has delivered the suitors into your
hand, I will give you a list of the women in the house who have been
ill-behaved, and of those who are guiltless."

And Ulysses answered, "Nurse, you ought not to speak in that way; I am
well able to form my own opinion about one and all of them; hold your
tongue and leave everything to heaven."

As he said this Euryclea left the cloister to fetch some more water, for
the first had been all spilt; and when she had washed him and anointed
him with oil, Ulysses drew his seat nearer to the fire to warm himself,
and hid the scar under his rags. Then Penelope began talking to him and
said:

"Stranger, I should like to speak with you briefly about another matter.
It is indeed nearly bed time--for those, at least, who can sleep in
spite of sorrow. As for myself, heaven has given me a life of such
unmeasurable woe, that even by day when I am attending to my duties and
looking after the servants, I am still weeping and lamenting during the
whole time; then, when night comes, and we all of us go to bed, I lie
awake thinking, and my heart becomes a prey to the most incessant and
cruel tortures. As the dun nightingale, daughter of Pandareus, sings in
the early spring from her seat in shadiest covert hid, and with many
a plaintive trill pours out the tale how by mishap she killed her own
child Itylus, son of king Zethus, even so does my mind toss and turn in
its uncertainty whether I ought to stay with my son here, and safeguard
my substance, my bondsmen, and the greatness of my house, out of regard
to public opinion and the memory of my late husband, or whether it is
not now time for me to go with the best of these suitors who are wooing
me and making me such magnificent presents. As long as my son was still
young, and unable to understand, he would not hear of my leaving my
husband's house, but now that he is full grown he begs and prays me to
do so, being incensed at the way in which the suitors are eating up his
property. Listen, then, to a dream that I have had and interpret it for
me if you can. I have twenty geese about the house that eat mash out
of a trough, {155} and of which I am exceedingly fond. I dreamed that a
great eagle came swooping down from a mountain, and dug his curved beak
into the neck of each of them till he had killed them all. Presently
he soared off into the sky, and left them lying dead about the yard;
whereon I wept in my dream till all my maids gathered round me, so
piteously was I grieving because the eagle had killed my geese. Then he
came back again, and perching on a projecting rafter spoke to me with
human voice, and told me to leave off crying. 'Be of good courage,' he
said, 'daughter of Icarius; this is no dream, but a vision of good omen
that shall surely come to pass. The geese are the suitors, and I am no
longer an eagle, but your own husband, who am come back to you, and who
will bring these suitors to a disgraceful end.' On this I woke, and when
I looked out I saw my geese at the trough eating their mash as usual."

"This dream, Madam," replied Ulysses, "can admit but of one
interpretation, for had not Ulysses himself told you how it shall be
fulfilled? The death of the suitors is portended, and not one single one
of them will escape."

And Penelope answered, "Stranger, dreams are very curious and
unaccountable things, and they do not by any means invariably come true.
There are two gates through which these unsubstantial fancies proceed;
the one is of horn, and the other ivory. Those that come through
the gate of ivory are fatuous, but those from the gate of horn mean
something to those that see them. I do not think, however, that my own
dream came through the gate of horn, though I and my son should be most
thankful if it proves to have done so. Furthermore I say--and lay my
saying to your heart--the coming dawn will usher in the ill-omened day
that is to sever me from the house of Ulysses, for I am about to hold a
tournament of axes. My husband used to set up twelve axes in the court,
one in front of the other, like the stays upon which a ship is built;
he would then go back from them and shoot an arrow through the whole
twelve. I shall make the suitors try to do the same thing, and whichever
of them can string the bow most easily, and send his arrow through all
the twelve axes, him will I follow, and quit this house of my lawful
husband, so goodly and so abounding in wealth. But even so, I doubt not
that I shall remember it in my dreams."

Then Ulysses answered, "Madam, wife of Ulysses, you need not defer your
tournament, for Ulysses will return ere ever they can string the bow,
handle it how they will, and send their arrows through the iron."

To this Penelope said, "As long, sir, as you will sit here and talk
to me, I can have no desire to go to bed. Still, people cannot do
permanently without sleep, and heaven has appointed us dwellers on earth
a time for all things. I will therefore go upstairs and recline upon
that couch which I have never ceased to flood with my tears from the day
Ulysses set out for the city with a hateful name."

She then went upstairs to her own room, not alone, but attended by her
maidens, and when there, she lamented her dear husband till Minerva shed
sweet sleep over her eyelids.


Book XX

ULYSSES CANNOT SLEEP--PENELOPE'S PRAYER TO DIANA--THE TWO SIGNS FROM
HEAVEN--EUMAEUS AND PHILOETIUS ARRIVE--THE SUITORS DINE--CTESIPPUS
THROWS AN OX'S FOOT AT ULYSSES--THEOCLYMENUS FORETELLS DISASTER AND
LEAVES THE HOUSE.

Ulysses slept in the cloister upon an undressed bullock's hide, on the
top of which he threw several skins of the sheep the suitors had eaten,
and Eurynome {156} threw a cloak over him after he had laid himself
down. There, then, Ulysses lay wakefully brooding upon the way in which
he should kill the suitors; and by and by, the women who had been in the
habit of misconducting themselves with them, left the house giggling and
laughing with one another. This made Ulysses very angry, and he doubted
whether to get up and kill every single one of them then and there, or
to let them sleep one more and last time with the suitors. His heart
growled within him, and as a bitch with puppies growls and shows her
teeth when she sees a stranger, so did his heart growl with anger at
the evil deeds that were being done: but he beat his breast and said,
"Heart, be still, you had worse than this to bear on the day when the
terrible Cyclops ate your brave companions; yet you bore it in silence
till your cunning got you safe out of the cave, though you made sure of
being killed."

Thus he chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but he
tossed about as one who turns a paunch full of blood and fat in front
of a hot fire, doing it first on one side and then on the other, that he
may get it cooked as soon as possible, even so did he turn himself about
from side to side, thinking all the time how, single handed as he was,
he should contrive to kill so large a body of men as the wicked suitors.
But by and by Minerva came down from heaven in the likeness of a woman,
and hovered over his head saying, "My poor unhappy man, why do you lie
awake in this way? This is your house: your wife is safe inside it, and
so is your son who is just such a young man as any father may be proud
of."

"Goddess," answered Ulysses, "all that you have said is true, but I am
in some doubt as to how I shall be able to kill these wicked suitors
single handed, seeing what a number of them there always are. And there
is this further difficulty, which is still more considerable. Supposing
that with Jove's and your assistance I succeed in killing them, I must
ask you to consider where I am to escape to from their avengers when it
is all over."

"For shame," replied Minerva, "why, any one else would trust a worse
ally than myself, even though that ally were only a mortal and less wise
than I am. Am I not a goddess, and have I not protected you throughout
in all your troubles? I tell you plainly that even though there were
fifty bands of men surrounding us and eager to kill us, you should take
all their sheep and cattle, and drive them away with you. But go to
sleep; it is a very bad thing to lie awake all night, and you shall be
out of your troubles before long."

As she spoke she shed sleep over his eyes, and then went back to
Olympus.

While Ulysses was thus yielding himself to a very deep slumber that
eased the burden of his sorrows, his admirable wife awoke, and sitting
up in her bed began to cry. When she had relieved herself by weeping she
prayed to Diana saying, "Great Goddess Diana, daughter of Jove, drive an
arrow into my heart and slay me; or let some whirlwind snatch me up and
bear me through paths of darkness till it drop me into the mouths
of over-flowing Oceanus, as it did the daughters of Pandareus. The
daughters of Pandareus lost their father and mother, for the gods killed
them, so they were left orphans. But Venus took care of them, and fed
them on cheese, honey, and sweet wine. Juno taught them to excel all
women in beauty of form and understanding; Diana gave them an imposing
presence, and Minerva endowed them with every kind of accomplishment;
but one day when Venus had gone up to Olympus to see Jove about getting
them married (for well does he know both what shall happen and what
not happen to every one) the storm winds came and spirited them away to
become handmaids to the dread Erinyes. Even so I wish that the gods who
live in heaven would hide me from mortal sight, or that fair Diana might
strike me, for I would fain go even beneath the sad earth if I might
do so still looking towards Ulysses only, and without having to yield
myself to a worse man than he was. Besides, no matter how much people
may grieve by day, they can put up with it so long as they can sleep at
night, for when the eyes are closed in slumber people forget good and
ill alike; whereas my misery haunts me even in my dreams. This very
night methought there was one lying by my side who was like Ulysses as
he was when he went away with his host, and I rejoiced, for I believed
that it was no dream, but the very truth itself."

On this the day broke, but Ulysses heard the sound of her weeping, and
it puzzled him, for it seemed as though she already knew him and was by
his side. Then he gathered up the cloak and the fleeces on which he had
lain, and set them on a seat in the cloister, but he took the bullock's
hide out into the open. He lifted up his hands to heaven, and prayed,
saying "Father Jove, since you have seen fit to bring me over land and
sea to my own home after all the afflictions you have laid upon me, give
me a sign out of the mouth of some one or other of those who are now
waking within the house, and let me have another sign of some kind from
outside."

Thus did he pray. Jove heard his prayer and forthwith thundered high
up among the clouds from the splendour of Olympus, and Ulysses was glad
when he heard it. At the same time within the house, a miller-woman from
hard by in the mill room lifted up her voice and gave him another sign.
There were twelve miller-women whose business it was to grind wheat and
barley which are the staff of life. The others had ground their task and
had gone to take their rest, but this one had not yet finished, for
she was not so strong as they were, and when she heard the thunder she
stopped grinding and gave the sign to her master. "Father Jove," said
she, "you, who rule over heaven and earth, you have thundered from a
clear sky without so much as a cloud in it, and this means something for
somebody; grant the prayer, then, of me your poor servant who calls
upon you, and let this be the very last day that the suitors dine in the
house of Ulysses. They have worn me out with labour of grinding meal for
them, and I hope they may never have another dinner anywhere at all."

Ulysses was glad when he heard the omens conveyed to him by the woman's
speech, and by the thunder, for he knew they meant that he should avenge
himself on the suitors.

Then the other maids in the house rose and lit the fire on the hearth;
Telemachus also rose and put on his clothes. He girded his sword about
his shoulder, bound his sandals on to his comely feet, and took a
doughty spear with a point of sharpened bronze; then he went to the
threshold of the cloister and said to Euryclea, "Nurse, did you make the
stranger comfortable both as regards bed and board, or did you let him
shift for himself?--for my mother, good woman though she is, has a
way of paying great attention to second-rate people, and of neglecting
others who are in reality much better men."

"Do not find fault child," said Euryclea, "when there is no one to find
fault with. The stranger sat and drank his wine as long as he liked:
your mother did ask him if he would take any more bread and he said he
would not. When he wanted to go to bed she told the servants to make one
for him, but he said he was such a wretched outcast that he would not
sleep on a bed and under blankets; he insisted on having an undressed
bullock's hide and some sheepskins put for him in the cloister and I
threw a cloak over him myself." {157}

Then Telemachus went out of the court to the place where the Achaeans
were meeting in assembly; he had his spear in his hand, and he was not
alone, for his two dogs went with him. But Euryclea called the maids and
said, "Come, wake up; set about sweeping the cloisters and sprinkling
them with water to lay the dust; put the covers on the seats; wipe down
the tables, some of you, with a wet sponge; clean out the mixing-jugs
and the cups, and go for water from the fountain at once; the suitors
will be here directly; they will be here early, for it is a feast day."

Thus did she speak, and they did even as she had said: twenty of them
went to the fountain for water, and the others set themselves busily to
work about the house. The men who were in attendance on the suitors also
came up and began chopping firewood. By and by the women returned from
the fountain, and the swineherd came after them with the three best pigs
he could pick out. These he let feed about the premises, and then he
said good-humouredly to Ulysses, "Stranger, are the suitors treating you
any better now, or are they as insolent as ever?"

"May heaven," answered Ulysses, "requite to them the wickedness with
which they deal high-handedly in another man's house without any sense
of shame."

Thus did they converse; meanwhile Melanthius the goatherd came up, for
he too was bringing in his best goats for the suitors' dinner; and he
had two shepherds with him. They tied the goats up under the gatehouse,
and then Melanthius began gibing at Ulysses. "Are you still here,
stranger," said he, "to pester people by begging about the house? Why
can you not go elsewhere? You and I shall not come to an understanding
before we have given each other a taste of our fists. You beg without
any sense of decency: are there not feasts elsewhere among the Achaeans,
as well as here?"

Ulysses made no answer, but bowed his head and brooded. Then a third
man, Philoetius, joined them, who was bringing in a barren heifer and
some goats. These were brought over by the boatmen who are there to take
people over when any one comes to them. So Philoetius made his heifer
and his goats secure under the gatehouse, and then went up to the
swineherd. "Who, Swineherd," said he, "is this stranger that is lately
come here? Is he one of your men? What is his family? Where does he come
from? Poor fellow, he looks as if he had been some great man, but the
gods give sorrow to whom they will--even to kings if it so pleases
them."

As he spoke he went up to Ulysses and saluted him with his right hand;
"Good day to you, father stranger," said he, "you seem to be very poorly
off now, but I hope you will have better times by and by. Father Jove,
of all gods you are the most malicious. We are your own children, yet
you show us no mercy in all our misery and afflictions. A sweat came
over me when I saw this man, and my eyes filled with tears, for he
reminds me of Ulysses, who I fear is going about in just such rags as
this man's are, if indeed he is still among the living. If he is already
dead and in the house of Hades, then, alas! for my good master, who made
me his stockman when I was quite young among the Cephallenians, and now
his cattle are countless; no one could have done better with them than I
have, for they have bred like ears of corn; nevertheless I have to keep
bringing them in for others to eat, who take no heed to his son though
he is in the house, and fear not the wrath of heaven, but are already
eager to divide Ulysses' property among them because he has been away so
long. I have often thought--only it would not be right while his son
is living--of going off with the cattle to some foreign country; bad as
this would be, it is still harder to stay here and be ill-treated about
other people's herds. My position is intolerable, and I should long
since have run away and put myself under the protection of some other
chief, only that I believe my poor master will yet return, and send all
these suitors flying out of the house."

"Stockman," answered Ulysses, "you seem to be a very well-disposed
person, and I can see that you are a man of sense. Therefore I will tell
you, and will confirm my words with an oath. By Jove, the chief of all
gods, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I am now come, Ulysses
shall return before you leave this place, and if you are so minded you
shall see him killing the suitors who are now masters here."

"If Jove were to bring this to pass," replied the stockman, "you should
see how I would do my very utmost to help him."

And in like manner Eumaeus prayed that Ulysses might return home.

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were hatching a plot to
murder Telemachus: but a bird flew near them on their left hand--an
eagle with a dove in its talons. On this Amphinomus said, "My friends,
this plot of ours to murder Telemachus will not succeed; let us go to
dinner instead."

The others assented, so they went inside and laid their cloaks on the
benches and seats. They sacrificed the sheep, goats, pigs, and the
heifer, and when the inward meats were cooked they served them round.
They mixed the wine in the mixing-bowls, and the swineherd gave every
man his cup, while Philoetius handed round the bread in the bread
baskets, and Melanthius poured them out their wine. Then they laid their
hands upon the good things that were before them.

Telemachus purposely made Ulysses sit in the part of the cloister that
was paved with stone; {158} he gave him a shabby looking seat at a
little table to himself, and had his portion of the inward meats brought
to him, with his wine in a gold cup. "Sit there," said he, "and drink
your wine among the great people. I will put a stop to the gibes and
blows of the suitors, for this is no public house, but belongs to
Ulysses, and has passed from him to me. Therefore, suitors, keep your
hands and your tongues to yourselves, or there will be mischief."

The suitors bit their lips, and marvelled at the boldness of his speech;
then Antinous said, "We do not like such language but we will put up
with it, for Telemachus is threatening us in good earnest. If Jove had
let us we should have put a stop to his brave talk ere now."

Thus spoke Antinous, but Telemachus heeded him not. Meanwhile the
heralds were bringing the holy hecatomb through the city, and the
Achaeans gathered under the shady grove of Apollo.

Then they roasted the outer meat, drew it off the spits, gave every man
his portion, and feasted to their heart's content; those who waited
at table gave Ulysses exactly the same portion as the others had, for
Telemachus had told them to do so.

But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment drop their
insolence, for she wanted Ulysses to become still more bitter against
them. Now there happened to be among them a ribald fellow, whose name
was Ctesippus, and who came from Same. This man, confident in his
great wealth, was paying court to the wife of Ulysses, and said to the
suitors, "Hear what I have to say. The stranger has already had as
large a portion as any one else; this is well, for it is not right nor
reasonable to ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes here. I
will, however, make him a present on my own account, that he may have
something to give to the bath-woman, or to some other of Ulysses'
servants."

As he spoke he picked up a heifer's foot from the meat-basket in which
it lay, and threw it at Ulysses, but Ulysses turned his head a little
aside, and avoided it, smiling grimly Sardinian fashion {159} as he did
so, and it hit the wall, not him. On this Telemachus spoke fiercely to
Ctesippus, "It is a good thing for you," said he, "that the stranger
turned his head so that you missed him. If you had hit him I should have
run you through with my spear, and your father would have had to see
about getting you buried rather than married in this house. So let me
have no more unseemly behaviour from any of you, for I am grown up
now to the knowledge of good and evil and understand what is going on,
instead of being the child that I have been heretofore. I have long seen
you killing my sheep and making free with my corn and wine: I have put
up with this, for one man is no match for many, but do me no further
violence. Still, if you wish to kill me, kill me; I would far rather die
than see such disgraceful scenes day after day--guests insulted, and men
dragging the women servants about the house in an unseemly way."

They all held their peace till at last Agelaus son of Damastor said, "No
one should take offence at what has just been said, nor gainsay it, for
it is quite reasonable. Leave off, therefore, ill-treating the stranger,
or any one else of the servants who are about the house; I would say,
however, a friendly word to Telemachus and his mother, which I trust may
commend itself to both. 'As long,' I would say, 'as you had ground for
hoping that Ulysses would one day come home, no one could complain of
your waiting and suffering {160} the suitors to be in your house. It
would have been better that he should have returned, but it is now
sufficiently clear that he will never do so; therefore talk all this
quietly over with your mother, and tell her to marry the best man,
and the one who makes her the most advantageous offer. Thus you will
yourself be able to manage your own inheritance, and to eat and drink
in peace, while your mother will look after some other man's house, not
yours.'"

To this Telemachus answered, "By Jove, Agelaus, and by the sorrows of my
unhappy father, who has either perished far from Ithaca, or is wandering
in some distant land, I throw no obstacles in the way of my mother's
marriage; on the contrary I urge her to choose whomsoever she will, and
I will give her numberless gifts into the bargain, but I dare not insist
point blank that she shall leave the house against her own wishes.
Heaven forbid that I should do this."

Minerva now made the suitors fall to laughing immoderately, and set
their wits wandering; but they were laughing with a forced laughter.
Their meat became smeared with blood; their eyes filled with tears,
and their hearts were heavy with forebodings. Theoclymenus saw this
and said, "Unhappy men, what is it that ails you? There is a shroud
of darkness drawn over you from head to foot, your cheeks are wet with
tears; the air is alive with wailing voices; the walls and roof-beams
drip blood; the gate of the cloisters and the court beyond them are full
of ghosts trooping down into the night of hell; the sun is blotted out
of heaven, and a blighting gloom is over all the land."

Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily. Eurymachus
then said, "This stranger who has lately come here has lost his senses.
Servants, turn him out into the streets, since he finds it so dark
here."

But Theoclymenus said, "Eurymachus, you need not send any one with me.
I have eyes, ears, and a pair of feet of my own, to say nothing of an
understanding mind. I will take these out of the house with me, for
I see mischief overhanging you, from which not one of you men who are
insulting people and plotting ill deeds in the house of Ulysses will be
able to escape."

He left the house as he spoke, and went back to Piraeus who gave him
welcome, but the suitors kept looking at one another and provoking
Telemachus by laughing at the strangers. One insolent fellow said to
him, "Telemachus, you are not happy in your guests; first you have this
importunate tramp, who comes begging bread and wine and has no skill
for work or for hard fighting, but is perfectly useless, and now here is
another fellow who is setting himself up as a prophet. Let me persuade
you, for it will be much better to put them on board ship and send them
off to the Sicels to sell for what they will bring."

Telemachus gave him no heed, but sate silently watching his father,
expecting every moment that he would begin his attack upon the suitors.

Meanwhile the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, had had a rich seat
placed for her facing the court and cloisters, so that she could hear
what every one was saying. The dinner indeed had been prepared amid much
merriment; it had been both good and abundant, for they had sacrificed
many victims; but the supper was yet to come, and nothing can be
conceived more gruesome than the meal which a goddess and a brave man
were soon to lay before them--for they had brought their doom upon
themselves.


Book XXI

THE TRIAL OF THE AXES, DURING WHICH ULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO EUMAEUS
AND PHILOETIUS

Minerva now put it in Penelope's mind to make the suitors try their
skill with the bow and with the iron axes, in contest among themselves,
as a means of bringing about their destruction. She went upstairs and
got the store-room key, which was made of bronze and had a handle of
ivory; she then went with her maidens into the store-room at the end of
the house, where her husband's treasures of gold, bronze, and wrought
iron were kept, and where was also his bow, and the quiver full of
deadly arrows that had been given him by a friend whom he had met in
Lacedaemon--Iphitus the son of Eurytus. The two fell in with one another
in Messene at the house of Ortilochus, where Ulysses was staying in
order to recover a debt that was owing from the whole people; for the
Messenians had carried off three hundred sheep from Ithaca, and had
sailed away with them and with their shepherds. In quest of these
Ulysses took a long journey while still quite young, for his father and
the other chieftains sent him on a mission to recover them. Iphitus had
gone there also to try and get back twelve brood mares that he had lost,
and the mule foals that were running with them. These mares were the
death of him in the end, for when he went to the house of Jove's son,
mighty Hercules, who performed such prodigies of valour, Hercules to his
shame killed him, though he was his guest, for he feared not heaven's
vengeance, nor yet respected his own table which he had set before
Iphitus, but killed him in spite of everything, and kept the mares
himself. It was when claiming these that Iphitus met Ulysses, and gave
him the bow which mighty Eurytus had been used to carry, and which on
his death had been left by him to his son. Ulysses gave him in return
a sword and a spear, and this was the beginning of a fast friendship,
although they never visited at one another's houses, for Jove's son
Hercules killed Iphitus ere they could do so. This bow, then, given him
by Iphitus, had not been taken with him by Ulysses when he sailed for
Troy; he had used it so long as he had been at home, but had left it
behind as having been a keepsake from a valued friend.

Penelope presently reached the oak threshold of the store-room; the
carpenter had planed this duly, and had drawn a line on it so as to get
it quite straight; he had then set the door posts into it and hung the
doors. She loosed the strap from the handle of the door, put in the key,
and drove it straight home to shoot back the bolts that held the doors;
{161} these flew open with a noise like a bull bellowing in a meadow,
and Penelope stepped upon the raised platform, where the chests stood in
which the fair linen and clothes were laid by along with fragrant herbs:
reaching thence, she took down the bow with its bow case from the peg
on which it hung. She sat down with it on her knees, weeping bitterly as
she took the bow out of its case, and when her tears had relieved her,
she went to the cloister where the suitors were, carrying the bow and
the quiver, with the many deadly arrows that were inside it. Along
with her came her maidens, bearing a chest that contained much iron
and bronze which her husband had won as prizes. When she reached the
suitors, she stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of
the cloister, holding a veil before her face, and with a maid on either
side of her. Then she said:

"Listen to me you suitors, who persist in abusing the hospitality of
this house because its owner has been long absent, and without other
pretext than that you want to marry me; this, then, being the prize that
you are contending for, I will bring out the mighty bow of Ulysses, and
whomsoever of you shall string it most easily and send his arrow through
each one of twelve axes, him will I follow and quit this house of my
lawful husband, so goodly, and so abounding in wealth. But even so I
doubt not that I shall remember it in my dreams."

As she spoke, she told Eumaeus to set the bow and the pieces of iron
before the suitors, and Eumaeus wept as he took them to do as she had
bidden him. Hard by, the stockman wept also when he saw his master's
bow, but Antinous scolded them. "You country louts," said he, "silly
simpletons; why should you add to the sorrows of your mistress by crying
in this way? She has enough to grieve her in the loss of her husband;
sit still, therefore, and eat your dinners in silence, or go outside if
you want to cry, and leave the bow behind you. We suitors shall have to
contend for it with might and main, for we shall find it no light matter
to string such a bow as this is. There is not a man of us all who is
such another as Ulysses; for I have seen him and remember him, though I
was then only a child."

This was what he said, but all the time he was expecting to be able to
string the bow and shoot through the iron, whereas in fact he was to
be the first that should taste of the arrows from the hands of Ulysses,
whom he was dishonouring in his own house--egging the others on to do so
also.

Then Telemachus spoke. "Great heavens!" he exclaimed, "Jove must have
robbed me of my senses. Here is my dear and excellent mother saying she
will quit this house and marry again, yet I am laughing and enjoying
myself as though there were nothing happening. But, suitors, as the
contest has been agreed upon, let it go forward. It is for a woman whose
peer is not to be found in Pylos, Argos, or Mycene, nor yet in Ithaca
nor on the mainland. You know this as well as I do; what need have I to
speak in praise of my mother? Come on, then, make no excuses for delay,
but let us see whether you can string the bow or no. I too will make
trial of it, for if I can string it and shoot through the iron, I shall
not suffer my mother to quit this house with a stranger, not if I can
win the prizes which my father won before me."

As he spoke he sprang from his seat, threw his crimson cloak from him,
and took his sword from his shoulder. First he set the axes in a row, in
a long groove which he had dug for them, and had made straight by line.
{162} Then he stamped the earth tight round them, and everyone was
surprised when they saw him set them up so orderly, though he had never
seen anything of the kind before. This done, he went on to the pavement
to make trial of the bow; thrice did he tug at it, trying with all his
might to draw the string, and thrice he had to leave off, though he had
hoped to string the bow and shoot through the iron. He was trying for
the fourth time, and would have strung it had not Ulysses made a sign to
check him in spite of all his eagerness. So he said:

"Alas! I shall either be always feeble and of no prowess, or I am too
young, and have not yet reached my full strength so as to be able
to hold my own if any one attacks me. You others, therefore, who are
stronger than I, make trial of the bow and get this contest settled."

On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door [that led
into the house] with the arrow standing against the top of the bow. Then
he sat down on the seat from which he had risen, and Antinous said:

"Come on each of you in his turn, going towards the right from the place
at which the cupbearer begins when he is handing round the wine."

The rest agreed, and Leiodes son of Oenops was the first to rise. He
was sacrificial priest to the suitors, and sat in the corner near the
mixing-bowl. {163} He was the only man who hated their evil deeds and
was indignant with the others. He was now the first to take the bow and
arrow, so he went on to the pavement to make his trial, but he could not
string the bow, for his hands were weak and unused to hard work, they
therefore soon grew tired, and he said to the suitors, "My friends, I
cannot string it; let another have it, this bow shall take the life and
soul out of many a chief among us, for it is better to die than to live
after having missed the prize that we have so long striven for, and
which has brought us so long together. Some one of us is even now hoping
and praying that he may marry Penelope, but when he has seen this bow
and tried it, let him woo and make bridal offerings to some other woman,
and let Penelope marry whoever makes her the best offer and whose lot it
is to win her."

On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door, {164}
with the arrow standing against the tip of the bow. Then he took his
seat again on the seat from which he had risen; and Antinous rebuked him
saying:

"Leiodes, what are you talking about? Your words are monstrous and
intolerable; it makes me angry to listen to you. Shall, then, this bow
take the life of many a chief among us, merely because you cannot bend
it yourself? True, you were not born to be an archer, but there are
others who will soon string it."

Then he said to Melanthius the goatherd, "Look sharp, light a fire in
the court, and set a seat hard by with a sheep skin on it; bring us also
a large ball of lard, from what they have in the house. Let us warm the
bow and grease it--we will then make trial of it again, and bring the
contest to an end."

Melanthius lit the fire, and set a seat covered with sheep skins beside
it. He also brought a great ball of lard from what they had in the
house, and the suitors warmed the bow and again made trial of it, but
they were none of them nearly strong enough to string it. Nevertheless
there still remained Antinous and Eurymachus, who were the ringleaders
among the suitors and much the foremost among them all.

Then the swineherd and the stockman left the cloisters together, and
Ulysses followed them. When they had got outside the gates and the outer
yard, Ulysses said to them quietly:

"Stockman, and you swineherd, I have something in my mind which I am in
doubt whether to say or no; but I think I will say it. What manner of
men would you be to stand by Ulysses, if some god should bring him back
here all of a sudden? Say which you are disposed to do--to side with the
suitors, or with Ulysses?"

"Father Jove," answered the stockman, "would indeed that you might so
ordain it. If some god were but to bring Ulysses back, you should see
with what might and main I would fight for him."

In like words Eumaeus prayed to all the gods that Ulysses might return;
when, therefore, he saw for certain what mind they were of, Ulysses
said, "It is I, Ulysses, who am here. I have suffered much, but at last,
in the twentieth year, I am come back to my own country. I find that you
two alone of all my servants are glad that I should do so, for I
have not heard any of the others praying for my return. To you two,
therefore, will I unfold the truth as it shall be. If heaven shall
deliver the suitors into my hands, I will find wives for both of you,
will give you house and holding close to my own, and you shall be to me
as though you were brothers and friends of Telemachus. I will now give
you convincing proofs that you may know me and be assured. See, here is
the scar from the boar's tooth that ripped me when I was out hunting on
Mt. Parnassus with the sons of Autolycus."

As he spoke he drew his rags aside from the great scar, and when they
had examined it thoroughly, they both of them wept about Ulysses, threw
their arms round him, and kissed his head and shoulders, while Ulysses
kissed their hands and faces in return. The sun would have gone down
upon their mourning if Ulysses had not checked them and said:

"Cease your weeping, lest some one should come outside and see us, and
tell those who are within. When you go in, do so separately, not both
together; I will go first, and do you follow afterwards; let this
moreover be the token between us; the suitors will all of them try to
prevent me from getting hold of the bow and quiver; do you, therefore,
Eumaeus, place it in my hands when you are carrying it about, and
tell the women to close the doors of their apartment. If they hear any
groaning or uproar as of men fighting about the house, they must not
come out; they must keep quiet, and stay where they are at their work.
And I charge you, Philoetius, to make fast the doors of the outer court,
and to bind them securely at once."

When he had thus spoken, he went back to the house and took the seat
that he had left. Presently, his two servants followed him inside.

At this moment the bow was in the hands of Eurymachus, who was warming
it by the fire, but even so he could not string it, and he was greatly
grieved. He heaved a deep sigh and said, "I grieve for myself and for us
all; I grieve that I shall have to forgo the marriage, but I do not care
nearly so much about this, for there are plenty of other women in Ithaca
and elsewhere; what I feel most is the fact of our being so inferior to
Ulysses in strength that we cannot string his bow. This will disgrace us
in the eyes of those who are yet unborn."

"It shall not be so, Eurymachus," said Antinous, "and you know it
yourself. Today is the feast of Apollo throughout all the land; who can
string a bow on such a day as this? Put it on one side--as for the axes
they can stay where they are, for no one is likely to come to the house
and take them away: let the cupbearer go round with his cups, that we
may make our drink-offerings and drop this matter of the bow; we will
tell Melanthius to bring us in some goats tomorrow--the best he has; we
can then offer thigh bones to Apollo the mighty archer, and again make
trial of the bow, so as to bring the contest to an end."

The rest approved his words, and thereon men servants poured water over
the hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine
and water and handed it round after giving every man his drink-offering.
Then, when they had made their offerings and had drunk each as much as
he desired, Ulysses craftily said:--

"Suitors of the illustrious queen, listen that I may speak even as I am
minded. I appeal more especially to Eurymachus, and to Antinous who
has just spoken with so much reason. Cease shooting for the present and
leave the matter to the gods, but in the morning let heaven give victory
to whom it will. For the moment, however, give me the bow that I may
prove the power of my hands among you all, and see whether I still have
as much strength as I used to have, or whether travel and neglect have
made an end of it."

This made them all very angry, for they feared he might string the bow,
Antinous therefore rebuked him fiercely saying, "Wretched creature, you
have not so much as a grain of sense in your whole body; you ought
to think yourself lucky in being allowed to dine unharmed among your
betters, without having any smaller portion served you than we others
have had, and in being allowed to hear our conversation. No other beggar
or stranger has been allowed to hear what we say among ourselves; the
wine must have been doing you a mischief, as it does with all those who
drink immoderately. It was wine that inflamed the Centaur Eurytion when
he was staying with Peirithous among the Lapithae. When the wine had
got into his head, he went mad and did ill deeds about the house of
Peirithous; this angered the heroes who were there assembled, so they
rushed at him and cut off his ears and nostrils; then they dragged him
through the doorway out of the house, so he went away crazed, and bore
the burden of his crime, bereft of understanding. Henceforth, therefore,
there was war between mankind and the centaurs, but he brought it upon
himself through his own drunkenness. In like manner I can tell you that
it will go hardly with you if you string the bow: you will find no mercy
from any one here, for we shall at once ship you off to king Echetus,
who kills every one that comes near him: you will never get away alive,
so drink and keep quiet without getting into a quarrel with men younger
than yourself."

Penelope then spoke to him. "Antinous," said she, "it is not right that
you should ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes to this house.
If the stranger should prove strong enough to string the mighty bow of
Ulysses, can you suppose that he would take me home with him and make me
his wife? Even the man himself can have no such idea in his mind:
none of you need let that disturb his feasting; it would be out of all
reason."

"Queen Penelope," answered Eurymachus, "we do not suppose that this man
will take you away with him; it is impossible; but we are afraid lest
some of the baser sort, men or women among the Achaeans, should go
gossiping about and say, 'These suitors are a feeble folk; they are
paying court to the wife of a brave man whose bow not one of them was
able to string, and yet a beggarly tramp who came to the house strung it
at once and sent an arrow through the iron.' This is what will be said,
and it will be a scandal against us."

"Eurymachus," Penelope answered, "people who persist in eating up the
estate of a great chieftain and dishonouring his house must not expect
others to think well of them. Why then should you mind if men talk as
you think they will? This stranger is strong and well-built, he says
moreover that he is of noble birth. Give him the bow, and let us see
whether he can string it or no. I say--and it shall surely be--that if
Apollo vouchsafes him the glory of stringing it, I will give him a cloak
and shirt of good wear, with a javelin to keep off dogs and robbers,
and a sharp sword. I will also give him sandals, and will see him sent
safely wherever he wants to go."

Then Telemachus said, "Mother, I am the only man either in Ithaca or in
the islands that are over against Elis who has the right to let any
one have the bow or to refuse it. No one shall force me one way or the
other, not even though I choose to make the stranger a present of the
bow outright, and let him take it away with him. Go, then, within the
house and busy yourself with your daily duties, your loom, your distaff,
and the ordering of your servants. This bow is a man's matter, and mine
above all others, for it is I who am master here."

She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son's saying in her
heart. Then going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she mourned
her dear husband till Minerva sent sweet sleep over her eyelids.

The swineherd now took up the bow and was for taking it to Ulysses, but
the suitors clamoured at him from all parts of the cloisters, and one of
them said, "You idiot, where are you taking the bow to? Are you out of
your wits? If Apollo and the other gods will grant our prayer, your own
boarhounds shall get you into some quiet little place, and worry you to
death."

Eumaeus was frightened at the outcry they all raised, so he put the bow
down then and there, but Telemachus shouted out at him from the other
side of the cloisters, and threatened him saying, "Father Eumaeus,
bring the bow on in spite of them, or young as I am I will pelt you with
stones back to the country, for I am the better man of the two. I wish
I was as much stronger than all the other suitors in the house as I am
than you, I would soon send some of them off sick and sorry, for they
mean mischief."

Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily, which put them
in a better humour with Telemachus; so Eumaeus brought the bow on and
placed it in the hands of Ulysses. When he had done this, he called
Euryclea apart and said to her, "Euryclea, Telemachus says you are to
close the doors of the women's apartments. If they hear any groaning or
uproar as of men fighting about the house, they are not to come out, but
are to keep quiet and stay where they are at their work."

Euryclea did as she was told and closed the doors of the women's
apartments.

Meanwhile Philoetius slipped quietly out and made fast the gates of
the outer court. There was a ship's cable of byblus fibre lying in the
gatehouse, so he made the gates fast with it and then came in again,
resuming the seat that he had left, and keeping an eye on Ulysses, who
had now got the bow in his hands, and was turning it every way about,
and proving it all over to see whether the worms had been eating into
its two horns during his absence. Then would one turn towards his
neighbour saying, "This is some tricky old bow-fancier; either he has
got one like it at home, or he wants to make one, in such workmanlike
style does the old vagabond handle it."

Another said, "I hope he may be no more successful in other things than
he is likely to be in stringing this bow."

But Ulysses, when he had taken it up and examined it all over, strung it
as easily as a skilled bard strings a new peg of his lyre and makes
the twisted gut fast at both ends. Then he took it in his right hand
to prove the string, and it sang sweetly under his touch like the
twittering of a swallow. The suitors were dismayed, and turned colour
as they heard it; at that moment, moreover, Jove thundered loudly as a
sign, and the heart of Ulysses rejoiced as he heard the omen that the
son of scheming Saturn had sent him.

He took an arrow that was lying upon the table {165}--for those
which the Achaeans were so shortly about to taste were all inside the
quiver--he laid it on the centre-piece of the bow, and drew the notch of
the arrow and the string toward him, still seated on his seat. When
he had taken aim he let fly, and his arrow pierced every one of the
handle-holes of the axes from the first onwards till it had gone right
through them, and into the outer courtyard. Then he said to Telemachus:

"Your guest has not disgraced you, Telemachus. I did not miss what I
aimed at, and I was not long in stringing my bow. I am still strong, and
not as the suitors twit me with being. Now, however, it is time for
the Achaeans to prepare supper while there is still daylight, and
then otherwise to disport themselves with song and dance which are the
crowning ornaments of a banquet."

As he spoke he made a sign with his eyebrows, and Telemachus girded on
his sword, grasped his spear, and stood armed beside his father's seat.


Book XXII

THE KILLING OF THE SUITORS--THE MAIDS WHO HAVE MISCONDUCTED THEMSELVES
ARE MADE TO CLEANSE THE CLOISTERS AND ARE THEN HANGED.

Then Ulysses tore off his rags, and sprang on to the broad pavement
with his bow and his quiver full of arrows. He shed the arrows on to the
ground at his feet and said, "The mighty contest is at an end. I will
now see whether Apollo will vouchsafe it to me to hit another mark which
no man has yet hit."

On this he aimed a deadly arrow at Antinous, who was about to take up a
two-handled gold cup to drink his wine and already had it in his hands.
He had no thought of death--who amongst all the revellers would think
that one man, however brave, would stand alone among so many and kill
him? The arrow struck Antinous in the throat, and the point went clean
through his neck, so that he fell over and the cup dropped from his
hand, while a thick stream of blood gushed from his nostrils. He kicked
the table from him and upset the things on it, so that the bread and
roasted meats were all soiled as they fell over on to the ground. {166}
The suitors were in an uproar when they saw that a man had been hit;
they sprang in dismay one and all of them from their seats and looked
everywhere towards the walls, but there was neither shield nor spear,
and they rebuked Ulysses very angrily. "Stranger," said they, "you shall
pay for shooting people in this way: you shall see no other contest;
you are a doomed man; he whom you have slain was the foremost youth in
Ithaca, and the vultures shall devour you for having killed him."

Thus they spoke, for they thought that he had killed Antinous by
mistake, and did not perceive that death was hanging over the head of
every one of them. But Ulysses glared at them and said:

"Dogs, did you think that I should not come back from Troy? You have
wasted my substance, {167} have forced my women servants to lie with
you, and have wooed my wife while I was still living. You have feared
neither God nor man, and now you shall die."

They turned pale with fear as he spoke, and every man looked round about
to see whither he might fly for safety, but Eurymachus alone spoke.

"If you are Ulysses," said he, "then what you have said is just. We have
done much wrong on your lands and in your house. But Antinous who was
the head and front of the offending lies low already. It was all his
doing. It was not that he wanted to marry Penelope; he did not so much
care about that; what he wanted was something quite different, and Jove
has not vouchsafed it to him; he wanted to kill your son and to be chief
man in Ithaca. Now, therefore, that he has met the death which was his
due, spare the lives of your people. We will make everything good among
ourselves, and pay you in full for all that we have eaten and drunk.
Each one of us shall pay you a fine worth twenty oxen, and we will keep
on giving you gold and bronze till your heart is softened. Until we have
done this no one can complain of your being enraged against us."

Ulysses again glared at him and said, "Though you should give me all
that you have in the world both now and all that you ever shall have,
I will not stay my hand till I have paid all of you in full. You must
fight, or fly for your lives; and fly, not a man of you shall."

Their hearts sank as they heard him, but Eurymachus again spoke saying:

"My friends, this man will give us no quarter. He will stand where he
is and shoot us down till he has killed every man among us. Let us then
show fight; draw your swords, and hold up the tables to shield you
from his arrows. Let us have at him with a rush, to drive him from the
pavement and doorway: we can then get through into the town, and raise
such an alarm as shall soon stay his shooting."

As he spoke he drew his keen blade of bronze, sharpened on both sides,
and with a loud cry sprang towards Ulysses, but Ulysses instantly shot
an arrow into his breast that caught him by the nipple and fixed itself
in his liver. He dropped his sword and fell doubled up over his table.
The cup and all the meats went over on to the ground as he smote the
earth with his forehead in the agonies of death, and he kicked the stool
with his feet until his eyes were closed in darkness.

Then Amphinomus drew his sword and made straight at Ulysses to try and
get him away from the door; but Telemachus was too quick for him, and
struck him from behind; the spear caught him between the shoulders and
went right through his chest, so that he fell heavily to the ground and
struck the earth with his forehead. Then Telemachus sprang away from
him, leaving his spear still in the body, for he feared that if he
stayed to draw it out, some one of the Achaeans might come up and hack
at him with his sword, or knock him down, so he set off at a run, and
immediately was at his father's side. Then he said:

"Father, let me bring you a shield, two spears, and a brass helmet for
your temples. I will arm myself as well, and will bring other armour for
the swineherd and the stockman, for we had better be armed."

"Run and fetch them," answered Ulysses, "while my arrows hold out, or
when I am alone they may get me away from the door."

Telemachus did as his father said, and went off to the store room where
the armour was kept. He chose four shields, eight spears, and four brass
helmets with horse-hair plumes. He brought them with all speed to his
father, and armed himself first, while the stockman and the swineherd
also put on their armour, and took their places near Ulysses. Meanwhile
Ulysses, as long as his arrows lasted, had been shooting the suitors one
by one, and they fell thick on one another: when his arrows gave out, he
set the bow to stand against the end wall of the house by the door post,
and hung a shield four hides thick about his shoulders; on his comely
head he set his helmet, well wrought with a crest of horse-hair that
nodded menacingly above it, {168} and he grasped two redoubtable
bronze-shod spears.

Now there was a trap door {169} on the wall, while at one end of the
pavement {170} there was an exit leading to a narrow passage, and this
exit was closed by a well-made door. Ulysses told Philoetius to stand by
this door and guard it, for only one person could attack it at a time.
But Agelaus shouted out, "Cannot some one go up to the trap door and
tell the people what is going on? Help would come at once, and we should
soon make an end of this man and his shooting."

"This may not be, Agelaus," answered Melanthius, "the mouth of the
narrow passage is dangerously near the entrance to the outer court. One
brave man could prevent any number from getting in. But I know what I
will do, I will bring you arms from the store-room, for I am sure it is
there that Ulysses and his son have put them."

On this the goatherd Melanthius went by back passages to the store-room
of Ulysses' house. There he chose twelve shields, with as many helmets
and spears, and brought them back as fast as he could to give them to
the suitors. Ulysses' heart began to fail him when he saw the suitors
{171} putting on their armour and brandishing their spears. He saw the
greatness of the danger, and said to Telemachus, "Some one of the women
inside is helping the suitors against us, or it may be Melanthius."

Telemachus answered, "The fault, father, is mine, and mine only; I left
the store room door open, and they have kept a sharper look out than
I have. Go, Eumaeus, put the door to, and see whether it is one of the
women who is doing this, or whether, as I suspect, it is Melanthius the
son of Dolius."

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Melanthius was again going to the
store room to fetch more armour, but the swineherd saw him and said to
Ulysses who was beside him, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is that
scoundrel Melanthius, just as we suspected, who is going to the store
room. Say, shall I kill him, if I can get the better of him, or shall
I bring him here that you may take your own revenge for all the many
wrongs that he has done in your house?"

Ulysses answered, "Telemachus and I will hold these suitors in check, no
matter what they do; go back both of you and bind Melanthius' hands and
feet behind him. Throw him into the store room and make the door fast
behind you; then fasten a noose about his body, and string him close up
to the rafters from a high bearing-post, {172} that he may linger on in
an agony."

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said; they went to the
store room, which they entered before Melanthius saw them, for he was
busy searching for arms in the innermost part of the room, so the
two took their stand on either side of the door and waited. By and by
Melanthius came out with a helmet in one hand, and an old dry-rotted
shield in the other, which had been borne by Laertes when he was young,
but which had been long since thrown aside, and the straps had become
unsewn; on this the two seized him, dragged him back by the hair, and
threw him struggling to the ground. They bent his hands and feet well
behind his back, and bound them tight with a painful bond as Ulysses had
told them; then they fastened a noose about his body and strung him up
from a high pillar till he was close up to the rafters, and over him did
you then vaunt, O swineherd Eumaeus saying, "Melanthius, you will pass
the night on a soft bed as you deserve. You will know very well when
morning comes from the streams of Oceanus, and it is time for you to be
driving in your goats for the suitors to feast on."

There, then, they left him in very cruel bondage, and having put on
their armour they closed the door behind them and went back to take
their places by the side of Ulysses; whereon the four men stood in the
cloister, fierce and full of fury; nevertheless, those who were in the
body of the court were still both brave and many. Then Jove's daughter
Minerva came up to them, having assumed the voice and form of Mentor.
Ulysses was glad when he saw her and said, "Mentor, lend me your help,
and forget not your old comrade, nor the many good turns he has done
you. Besides, you are my age-mate."

But all the time he felt sure it was Minerva, and the suitors from the
other side raised an uproar when they saw her. Agelaus was the first to
reproach her. "Mentor," he cried, "do not let Ulysses beguile you into
siding with him and fighting the suitors. This is what we will do: when
we have killed these people, father and son, we will kill you too. You
shall pay for it with your head, and when we have killed you, we will
take all you have, in doors or out, and bring it into hotch-pot with
Ulysses' property; we will not let your sons live in your house, nor
your daughters, nor shall your widow continue to live in the city of
Ithaca."

This made Minerva still more furious, so she scolded Ulysses very
angrily. {173} "Ulysses," said she, "your strength and prowess are no
longer what they were when you fought for nine long years among the
Trojans about the noble lady Helen. You killed many a man in those days,
and it was through your stratagem that Priam's city was taken. How comes
it that you are so lamentably less valiant now that you are on your own
ground, face to face with the suitors in your own house? Come on, my
good fellow, stand by my side and see how Mentor, son of Alcimus shall
fight your foes and requite your kindnesses conferred upon him."

But she would not give him full victory as yet, for she wished still
further to prove his own prowess and that of his brave son, so she flew
up to one of the rafters in the roof of the cloister and sat upon it in
the form of a swallow.

Meanwhile Agelaus son of Damastor, Eurynomus, Amphimedon, Demoptolemus,
Pisander, and Polybus son of Polyctor bore the brunt of the fight upon
the suitors' side; of all those who were still fighting for their lives
they were by far the most valiant, for the others had already fallen
under the arrows of Ulysses. Agelaus shouted to them and said, "My
friends, he will soon have to leave off, for Mentor has gone away after
having done nothing for him but brag. They are standing at the doors
unsupported. Do not aim at him all at once, but six of you throw your
spears first, and see if you cannot cover yourselves with glory by
killing him. When he has fallen we need not be uneasy about the others."

They threw their spears as he bade them, but Minerva made them all of
no effect. One hit the door post; another went against the door; the
pointed shaft of another struck the wall; and as soon as they had
avoided all the spears of the suitors Ulysses said to his own men, "My
friends, I should say we too had better let drive into the middle of
them, or they will crown all the harm they have done us by killing us
outright."

They therefore aimed straight in front of them and threw their spears.
Ulysses killed Demoptolemus, Telemachus Euryades, Eumaeus Elatus, while
the stockman killed Pisander. These all bit the dust, and as the others
drew back into a corner Ulysses and his men rushed forward and regained
their spears by drawing them from the bodies of the dead.

The suitors now aimed a second time, but again Minerva made their
weapons for the most part without effect. One hit a bearing-post of
the cloister; another went against the door; while the pointed shaft of
another struck the wall. Still, Amphimedon just took a piece of the
top skin from off Telemachus's wrist, and Ctesippus managed to graze
Eumaeus's shoulder above his shield; but the spear went on and fell
to the ground. Then Ulysses and his men let drive into the crowd of
suitors. Ulysses hit Eurydamas, Telemachus Amphimedon, and Eumaeus
Polybus. After this the stockman hit Ctesippus in the breast, and
taunted him saying, "Foul-mouthed son of Polytherses, do not be so
foolish as to talk wickedly another time, but let heaven direct your
speech, for the gods are far stronger than men. I make you a present of
this advice to repay you for the foot which you gave Ulysses when he was
begging about in his own house."

Thus spoke the stockman, and Ulysses struck the son of Damastor with a
spear in close fight, while Telemachus hit Leocritus son of Evenor in
the belly, and the dart went clean through him, so that he fell forward
full on his face upon the ground. Then Minerva from her seat on the
rafter held up her deadly aegis, and the hearts of the suitors quailed.
They fled to the other end of the court like a herd of cattle maddened
by the gadfly in early summer when the days are at their longest. As
eagle-beaked, crook-taloned vultures from the mountains swoop down on
the smaller birds that cower in flocks upon the ground, and kill
them, for they cannot either fight or fly, and lookers on enjoy the
sport--even so did Ulysses and his men fall upon the suitors and smite
them on every side. They made a horrible groaning as their brains were
being battered in, and the ground seethed with their blood.

Leiodes then caught the knees of Ulysses and said, "Ulysses I beseech
you have mercy upon me and spare me. I never wronged any of the women in
your house either in word or deed, and I tried to stop the others. I
saw them, but they would not listen, and now they are paying for their
folly. I was their sacrificing priest; if you kill me, I shall die
without having done anything to deserve it, and shall have got no thanks
for all the good that I did."

Ulysses looked sternly at him and answered, "If you were their
sacrificing priest, you must have prayed many a time that it might be
long before I got home again, and that you might marry my wife and have
children by her. Therefore you shall die."

With these words he picked up the sword that Agelaus had dropped when
he was being killed, and which was lying upon the ground. Then he struck
Leiodes on the back of his neck, so that his head fell rolling in the
dust while he was yet speaking.

The minstrel Phemius son of Terpes--he who had been forced by the
suitors to sing to them--now tried to save his life. He was standing
near towards the trap door, {174} and held his lyre in his hand. He did
not know whether to fly out of the cloister and sit down by the altar of
Jove that was in the outer court, and on which both Laertes and Ulysses
had offered up the thigh bones of many an ox, or whether to go straight
up to Ulysses and embrace his knees, but in the end he deemed it best
to embrace Ulysses' knees. So he laid his lyre on the ground between the
mixing bowl {175} and the silver-studded seat; then going up to Ulysses
he caught hold of his knees and said, "Ulysses, I beseech you have mercy
on me and spare me. You will be sorry for it afterwards if you kill a
bard who can sing both for gods and men as I can. I make all my lays
myself, and heaven visits me with every kind of inspiration. I would
sing to you as though you were a god, do not therefore be in such a
hurry to cut my head off. Your own son Telemachus will tell you that I
did not want to frequent your house and sing to the suitors after their
meals, but they were too many and too strong for me, so they made me."

Telemachus heard him, and at once went up to his father. "Hold!" he
cried, "the man is guiltless, do him no hurt; and we will spare Medon
too, who was always good to me when I was a boy, unless Philoetius or
Eumaeus has already killed him, or he has fallen in your way when you
were raging about the court."

Medon caught these words of Telemachus, for he was crouching under a
seat beneath which he had hidden by covering himself up with a freshly
flayed heifer's hide, so he threw off the hide, went up to Telemachus,
and laid hold of his knees.

"Here I am, my dear sir," said he, "stay your hand therefore, and tell
your father, or he will kill me in his rage against the suitors for
having wasted his substance and been so foolishly disrespectful to
yourself."

Ulysses smiled at him and answered, "Fear not; Telemachus has saved your
life, that you may know in future, and tell other people, how greatly
better good deeds prosper than evil ones. Go, therefore, outside
the cloisters into the outer court, and be out of the way of the
slaughter--you and the bard--while I finish my work here inside."

The pair went into the outer court as fast as they could, and sat down
by Jove's great altar, looking fearfully round, and still expecting that
they would be killed. Then Ulysses searched the whole court carefully
over, to see if anyone had managed to hide himself and was still living,
but he found them all lying in the dust and weltering in their blood.
They were like fishes which fishermen have netted out of the sea, and
thrown upon the beach to lie gasping for water till the heat of the sun
makes an end of them. Even so were the suitors lying all huddled up one
against the other.

Then Ulysses said to Telemachus, "Call nurse Euryclea; I have something
to say to her."

Telemachus went and knocked at the door of the women's room. "Make
haste," said he, "you old woman who have been set over all the other
women in the house. Come outside; my father wishes to speak to you."

When Euryclea heard this she unfastened the door of the women's room
and came out, following Telemachus. She found Ulysses among the
corpses bespattered with blood and filth like a lion that has just been
devouring an ox, and his breast and both his cheeks are all bloody, so
that he is a fearful sight; even so was Ulysses besmirched from head
to foot with gore. When she saw all the corpses and such a quantity of
blood, she was beginning to cry out for joy, for she saw that a great
deed had been done; but Ulysses checked her, "Old woman," said he,
"rejoice in silence; restrain yourself, and do not make any noise about
it; it is an unholy thing to vaunt over dead men. Heaven's doom and
their own evil deeds have brought these men to destruction, for they
respected no man in the whole world, neither rich nor poor, who came
near them, and they have come to a bad end as a punishment for their
wickedness and folly. Now, however, tell me which of the women in the
house have misconducted themselves, and who are innocent." {176}

"I will tell you the truth, my son," answered Euryclea. "There are fifty
women in the house whom we teach to do things, such as carding wool,
and all kinds of household work. Of these, twelve in all {177} have
misbehaved, and have been wanting in respect to me, and also to
Penelope. They showed no disrespect to Telemachus, for he has only
lately grown and his mother never permitted him to give orders to the
female servants; but let me go upstairs and tell your wife all that has
happened, for some god has been sending her to sleep."

"Do not wake her yet," answered Ulysses, "but tell the women who have
misconducted themselves to come to me."

Euryclea left the cloister to tell the women, and make them come to
Ulysses; in the meantime he called Telemachus, the stockman, and the
swineherd. "Begin," said he, "to remove the dead, and make the women
help you. Then, get sponges and clean water to swill down the tables and
seats. When you have thoroughly cleansed the whole cloisters, take the
women into the space between the domed room and the wall of the outer
court, and run them through with your swords till they are quite dead,
and have forgotten all about love and the way in which they used to lie
in secret with the suitors."

On this the women came down in a body, weeping and wailing bitterly.
First they carried the dead bodies out, and propped them up against one
another in the gatehouse. Ulysses ordered them about and made them do
their work quickly, so they had to carry the bodies out. When they had
done this, they cleaned all the tables and seats with sponges and water,
while Telemachus and the two others shovelled up the blood and dirt from
the ground, and the women carried it all away and put it out of doors.
Then when they had made the whole place quite clean and orderly, they
took the women out and hemmed them in the narrow space between the wall
of the domed room and that of the yard, so that they could not get away:
and Telemachus said to the other two, "I shall not let these women die
a clean death, for they were insolent to me and my mother, and used to
sleep with the suitors."

So saying he made a ship's cable fast to one of the bearing-posts that
supported the roof of the domed room, and secured it all around the
building, at a good height, lest any of the women's feet should touch
the ground; and as thrushes or doves beat against a net that has been
set for them in a thicket just as they were getting to their nest, and a
terrible fate awaits them, even so did the women have to put their heads
in nooses one after the other and die most miserably. {178} Their feet
moved convulsively for a while, but not for very long.

As for Melanthius, they took him through the cloister into the inner
court. There they cut off his nose and his ears; they drew out his
vitals and gave them to the dogs raw, and then in their fury they cut
off his hands and his feet.

When they had done this they washed their hands and feet and went back
into the house, for all was now over; and Ulysses said to the dear old
nurse Euryclea, "Bring me sulphur, which cleanses all pollution, and
fetch fire also that I may burn it, and purify the cloisters. Go,
moreover, and tell Penelope to come here with her attendants, and also
all the maidservants that are in the house."

"All that you have said is true," answered Euryclea, "but let me bring
you some clean clothes--a shirt and cloak. Do not keep these rags on
your back any longer. It is not right."

"First light me a fire," replied Ulysses.

She brought the fire and sulphur, as he had bidden her, and Ulysses
thoroughly purified the cloisters and both the inner and outer courts.
Then she went inside to call the women and tell them what had happened;
whereon they came from their apartment with torches in their hands, and
pressed round Ulysses to embrace him, kissing his head and shoulders and
taking hold of his hands. It made him feel as if he should like to weep,
for he remembered every one of them. {179}


Book XXIII

PENELOPE EVENTUALLY RECOGNISES HER HUSBAND--EARLY IN THE MORNING
ULYSSES, TELEMACHUS, EUMAEUS, AND PHILOETIUS LEAVE THE TOWN.

Euryclea now went upstairs laughing to tell her mistress that her dear
husband had come home. Her aged knees became young again and her feet
were nimble for joy as she went up to her mistress and bent over her
head to speak to her. "Wake up Penelope, my dear child," she exclaimed,
"and see with your own eyes something that you have been wanting this
long time past. Ulysses has at last indeed come home again, and has
killed the suitors who were giving so much trouble in his house, eating
up his estate and ill treating his son."

"My good nurse," answered Penelope, "you must be mad. The gods sometimes
send some very sensible people out of their minds, and make foolish
people become sensible. This is what they must have been doing to you;
for you always used to be a reasonable person. Why should you thus mock
me when I have trouble enough already--talking such nonsense, and waking
me up out of a sweet sleep that had taken possession of my eyes and
closed them? I have never slept so soundly from the day my poor husband
went to that city with the ill-omened name. Go back again into the
women's room; if it had been any one else who had woke me up to bring me
such absurd news I should have sent her away with a severe scolding. As
it is your age shall protect you."

"My dear child," answered Euryclea, "I am not mocking you. It is quite
true as I tell you that Ulysses is come home again. He was the stranger
whom they all kept on treating so badly in the cloister. Telemachus knew
all the time that he was come back, but kept his father's secret that he
might have his revenge on all these wicked people."

Then Penelope sprang up from her couch, threw her arms round Euryclea,
and wept for joy. "But my dear nurse," said she, "explain this to me;
if he has really come home as you say, how did he manage to overcome the
wicked suitors single handed, seeing what a number of them there always
were?"

"I was not there," answered Euryclea, "and do not know; I only heard
them groaning while they were being killed. We sat crouching and huddled
up in a corner of the women's room with the doors closed, till your
son came to fetch me because his father sent him. Then I found Ulysses
standing over the corpses that were lying on the ground all round him,
one on top of the other. You would have enjoyed it if you could have
seen him standing there all bespattered with blood and filth, and
looking just like a lion. But the corpses are now all piled up in the
gatehouse that is in the outer court, and Ulysses has lit a great fire
to purify the house with sulphur. He has sent me to call you, so come
with me that you may both be happy together after all; for now at last
the desire of your heart has been fulfilled; your husband is come home
to find both wife and son alive and well, and to take his revenge in his
own house on the suitors who behaved so badly to him."

"My dear nurse," said Penelope, "do not exult too confidently over all
this. You know how delighted every one would be to see Ulysses come
home--more particularly myself, and the son who has been born to both
of us; but what you tell me cannot be really true. It is some god who is
angry with the suitors for their great wickedness, and has made an end
of them; for they respected no man in the whole world, neither rich nor
poor, who came near them, and they have come to a bad end in consequence
of their iniquity; Ulysses is dead far away from the Achaean land; he
will never return home again."

Then nurse Euryclea said, "My child, what are you talking about? but you
were all hard of belief and have made up your mind that your husband is
never coming, although he is in the house and by his own fire side
at this very moment. Besides I can give you another proof; when I was
washing him I perceived the scar which the wild boar gave him, and I
wanted to tell you about it, but in his wisdom he would not let me, and
clapped his hands over my mouth; so come with me and I will make this
bargain with you--if I am deceiving you, you may have me killed by the
most cruel death you can think of."

"My dear nurse," said Penelope, "however wise you may be you can hardly
fathom the counsels of the gods. Nevertheless, we will go in search of
my son, that I may see the corpses of the suitors, and the man who has
killed them."

On this she came down from her upper room, and while doing so she
considered whether she should keep at a distance from her husband and
question him, or whether she should at once go up to him and embrace
him. When, however, she had crossed the stone floor of the cloister, she
sat down opposite Ulysses by the fire, against the wall at right angles
{180} [to that by which she had entered], while Ulysses sat near one of
the bearing-posts, looking upon the ground, and waiting to see what his
brave wife would say to him when she saw him. For a long time she sat
silent and as one lost in amazement. At one moment she looked him full
in the face, but then again directly, she was misled by his shabby
clothes and failed to recognise him, {181} till Telemachus began to
reproach her and said:

"Mother--but you are so hard that I cannot call you by such a name--why
do you keep away from my father in this way? Why do you not sit by his
side and begin talking to him and asking him questions? No other woman
could bear to keep away from her husband when he had come back to her
after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through so much;
but your heart always was as hard as a stone."

Penelope answered, "My son, I am so lost in astonishment that I can find
no words in which either to ask questions or to answer them. I cannot
even look him straight in the face. Still, if he really is Ulysses
come back to his own home again, we shall get to understand one another
better by and by, for there are tokens with which we two are alone
acquainted, and which are hidden from all others."

Ulysses smiled at this, and said to Telemachus, "Let your mother put me
to any proof she likes; she will make up her mind about it presently.
She rejects me for the moment and believes me to be somebody else,
because I am covered with dirt and have such bad clothes on; let us,
however, consider what we had better do next. When one man has killed
another--even though he was not one who would leave many friends to take
up his quarrel--the man who has killed him must still say good bye to
his friends and fly the country; whereas we have been killing the stay
of a whole town, and all the picked youth of Ithaca. I would have you
consider this matter."

"Look to it yourself, father," answered Telemachus, "for they say you
are the wisest counsellor in the world, and that there is no other
mortal man who can compare with you. We will follow you with right good
will, nor shall you find us fail you in so far as our strength holds
out."

"I will say what I think will be best," answered Ulysses. "First wash
and put your shirts on; tell the maids also to go to their own room and
dress; Phemius shall then strike up a dance tune on his lyre, so that if
people outside hear, or any of the neighbours, or some one going along
the street happens to notice it, they may think there is a wedding in
the house, and no rumours about the death of the suitors will get about
in the town, before we can escape to the woods upon my own land. Once
there, we will settle which of the courses heaven vouchsafes us shall
seem wisest."

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. First they washed
and put their shirts on, while the women got ready. Then Phemius took
his lyre and set them all longing for sweet song and stately dance. The
house re-echoed with the sound of men and women dancing, and the people
outside said, "I suppose the queen has been getting married at last.
She ought to be ashamed of herself for not continuing to protect her
husband's property until he comes home." {182}

This was what they said, but they did not know what it was that had been
happening. The upper servant Eurynome washed and anointed Ulysses in his
own house and gave him a shirt and cloak, while Minerva made him look
taller and stronger than before; she also made the hair grow thick on
the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms; she
glorified him about the head and shoulders just as a skilful workman who
has studied art of all kinds under Vulcan or Minerva--and his work is
full of beauty--enriches a piece of silver plate by gilding it. He came
from the bath looking like one of the immortals, and sat down opposite
his wife on the seat he had left. "My dear," said he, "heaven has
endowed you with a heart more unyielding than woman ever yet had. No
other woman could bear to keep away from her husband when he had come
back to her after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through
so much. But come, nurse, get a bed ready for me; I will sleep alone,
for this woman has a heart as hard as iron."

"My dear," answered Penelope, "I have no wish to set myself up, nor to
depreciate you; but I am not struck by your appearance, for I very well
remember what kind of a man you were when you set sail from Ithaca.
Nevertheless, Euryclea, take his bed outside the bed chamber that he
himself built. Bring the bed outside this room, and put bedding upon it
with fleeces, good coverlets, and blankets."

She said this to try him, but Ulysses was very angry and said, "Wife,
I am much displeased at what you have just been saying. Who has been
taking my bed from the place in which I left it? He must have found it a
hard task, no matter how skilled a workman he was, unless some god came
and helped him to shift it. There is no man living, however strong and
in his prime, who could move it from its place, for it is a marvellous
curiosity which I made with my very own hands. There was a young olive
growing within the precincts of the house, in full vigour, and about as
thick as a bearing-post. I built my room round this with strong walls
of stone and a roof to cover them, and I made the doors strong and
well-fitting. Then I cut off the top boughs of the olive tree and left
the stump standing. This I dressed roughly from the root upwards and
then worked with carpenter's tools well and skilfully, straightening
my work by drawing a line on the wood, and making it into a bed-prop.
I then bored a hole down the middle, and made it the centre-post of my
bed, at which I worked till I had finished it, inlaying it with gold and
silver; after this I stretched a hide of crimson leather from one side
of it to the other. So you see I know all about it, and I desire to
learn whether it is still there, or whether any one has been removing it
by cutting down the olive tree at its roots."

When she heard the sure proofs Ulysses now gave her, she fairly broke
down. She flew weeping to his side, flung her arms about his neck, and
kissed him. "Do not be angry with me Ulysses," she cried, "you, who are
the wisest of mankind. We have suffered, both of us. Heaven has denied
us the happiness of spending our youth, and of growing old, together; do
not then be aggrieved or take it amiss that I did not embrace you thus
as soon as I saw you. I have been shuddering all the time through fear
that someone might come here and deceive me with a lying story; for
there are many very wicked people going about. Jove's daughter Helen
would never have yielded herself to a man from a foreign country, if she
had known that the sons of Achaeans would come after her and bring her
back. Heaven put it in her heart to do wrong, and she gave no thought
to that sin, which has been the source of all our sorrows. Now, however,
that you have convinced me by showing that you know all about our
bed (which no human being has ever seen but you and I and a single
maidservant, the daughter of Actor, who was given me by my father on my
marriage, and who keeps the doors of our room) hard of belief though I
have been I can mistrust no longer."

Then Ulysses in his turn melted, and wept as he clasped his dear and
faithful wife to his bosom. As the sight of land is welcome to men who
are swimming towards the shore, when Neptune has wrecked their ship with
the fury of his winds and waves; a few alone reach the land, and these,
covered with brine, are thankful when they find themselves on firm
ground and out of danger--even so was her husband welcome to her as she
looked upon him, and she could not tear her two fair arms from about
his neck. Indeed they would have gone on indulging their sorrow till
rosy-fingered morn appeared, had not Minerva determined otherwise, and
held night back in the far west, while she would not suffer Dawn to
leave Oceanus, nor to yoke the two steeds Lampus and Phaethon that bear
her onward to break the day upon mankind.

At last, however, Ulysses said, "Wife, we have not yet reached the end
of our troubles. I have an unknown amount of toil still to undergo. It
is long and difficult, but I must go through with it, for thus the shade
of Teiresias prophesied concerning me, on the day when I went down into
Hades to ask about my return and that of my companions. But now let us
go to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep."

"You shall go to bed as soon as you please," replied Penelope, "now that
the gods have sent you home to your own good house and to your country.
But as heaven has put it in your mind to speak of it, tell me about the
task that lies before you. I shall have to hear about it later, so it is
better that I should be told at once."

"My dear," answered Ulysses, "why should you press me to tell you?
Still, I will not conceal it from you, though you will not like it. I do
not like it myself, for Teiresias bade me travel far and wide, carrying
an oar, till I came to a country where the people have never heard of
the sea, and do not even mix salt with their food. They know nothing
about ships, nor oars that are as the wings of a ship. He gave me this
certain token which I will not hide from you. He said that a wayfarer
should meet me and ask me whether it was a winnowing shovel that I had
on my shoulder. On this, I was to fix my oar in the ground and sacrifice
a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune; after which I was to go home and
offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven, one after the other. As for
myself, he said that death should come to me from the sea, and that my
life should ebb away very gently when I was full of years and peace of
mind, and my people should bless me. All this, he said, should surely
come to pass."

And Penelope said, "If the gods are going to vouchsafe you a happier
time in your old age, you may hope then to have some respite from
misfortune."

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Eurynome and the nurse took torches
and made the bed ready with soft coverlets; as soon as they had laid
them, the nurse went back into the house to go to her rest, leaving the
bed chamber woman Eurynome {183} to show Ulysses and Penelope to bed by
torch light. When she had conducted them to their room she went
back, and they then came joyfully to the rites of their own old bed.
Telemachus, Philoetius, and the swineherd now left off dancing, and made
the women leave off also. They then laid themselves down to sleep in the
cloisters.

When Ulysses and Penelope had had their fill of love they fell talking
with one another. She told him how much she had had to bear in seeing
the house filled with a crowd of wicked suitors who had killed so many
sheep and oxen on her account, and had drunk so many casks of wine.
Ulysses in his turn told her what he had suffered, and how much trouble
he had himself given to other people. He told her everything, and she
was so delighted to listen that she never went to sleep till he had
ended his whole story.

He began with his victory over the Cicons, and how he thence reached the
fertile land of the Lotus-eaters. He told her all about the Cyclops
and how he had punished him for having so ruthlessly eaten his brave
comrades; how he then went on to Aeolus, who received him hospitably and
furthered him on his way, but even so he was not to reach home, for to
his great grief a hurricane carried him out to sea again; how he went on
to the Laestrygonian city Telepylos, where the people destroyed all his
ships with their crews, save himself and his own ship only. Then he told
of cunning Circe and her craft, and how he sailed to the chill house of
Hades, to consult the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias, and how he
saw his old comrades in arms, and his mother who bore him and brought
him up when he was a child; how he then heard the wondrous singing of
the Sirens, and went on to the wandering rocks and terrible Charybdis
and to Scylla, whom no man had ever yet passed in safety; how his men
then ate the cattle of the sun-god, and how Jove therefore struck the
ship with his thunderbolts, so that all his men perished together,
himself alone being left alive; how at last he reached the Ogygian
island and the nymph Calypso, who kept him there in a cave, and fed
him, and wanted him to marry her, in which case she intended making him
immortal so that he should never grow old, but she could not persuade
him to let her do so; and how after much suffering he had found his way
to the Phaeacians, who had treated him as though he had been a god, and
sent him back in a ship to his own country after having given him gold,
bronze, and raiment in great abundance. This was the last thing about
which he told her, for here a deep sleep took hold upon him and eased
the burden of his sorrows.

Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. When she deemed that
Ulysses had had both of his wife and of repose, she bade gold-enthroned
Dawn rise out of Oceanus that she might shed light upon mankind. On
this, Ulysses rose from his comfortable bed and said to Penelope,
"Wife, we have both of us had our full share of troubles, you, here, in
lamenting my absence, and I in being prevented from getting home though
I was longing all the time to do so. Now, however, that we have at last
come together, take care of the property that is in the house. As for
the sheep and goats which the wicked suitors have eaten, I will take
many myself by force from other people, and will compel the Achaeans to
make good the rest till they shall have filled all my yards. I am now
going to the wooded lands out in the country to see my father who has
so long been grieved on my account, and to yourself I will give these
instructions, though you have little need of them. At sunrise it will
at once get abroad that I have been killing the suitors; go upstairs,
therefore, {184} and stay there with your women. See nobody and ask no
questions." {185}

As he spoke he girded on his armour. Then he roused Telemachus,
Philoetius, and Eumaeus, and told them all to put on their armour also.
This they did, and armed themselves. When they had done so, they
opened the gates and sallied forth, Ulysses leading the way. It was now
daylight, but Minerva nevertheless concealed them in darkness and led
them quickly out of the town.


Book XXIV

THE GHOSTS OF THE SUITORS IN HADES--ULYSSES AND HIS MEN GO TO THE HOUSE
OF LAERTES--THE PEOPLE OF ITHACA COME OUT TO ATTACK ULYSSES, BUT MINERVA
CONCLUDES A PEACE.

Then Mercury of Cyllene summoned the ghosts of the suitors, and in his
hand he held the fair golden wand with which he seals men's eyes in
sleep or wakes them just as he pleases; with this he roused the ghosts
and led them, while they followed whining and gibbering behind him. As
bats fly squealing in the hollow of some great cave, when one of them
has fallen out of the cluster in which they hang, even so did the ghosts
whine and squeal as Mercury the healer of sorrow led them down into the
dark abode of death. When they had passed the waters of Oceanus and the
rock Leucas, they came to the gates of the sun and the land of dreams,
whereon they reached the meadow of asphodel where dwell the souls and
shadows of them that can labour no more.

Here they found the ghost of Achilles son of Peleus, with those of
Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax, who was the finest and handsomest man
of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus himself.

They gathered round the ghost of the son of Peleus, and the ghost of
Agamemnon joined them, sorrowing bitterly. Round him were gathered also
the ghosts of those who had perished with him in the house of Aegisthus;
and the ghost of Achilles spoke first.

"Son of Atreus," it said, "we used to say that Jove had loved you better
from first to last than any other hero, for you were captain over many
and brave men, when we were all fighting together before Troy; yet the
hand of death, which no mortal can escape, was laid upon you all too
early. Better for you had you fallen at Troy in the hey-day of your
renown, for the Achaeans would have built a mound over your ashes, and
your son would have been heir to your good name, whereas it has now been
your lot to come to a most miserable end."

"Happy son of Peleus," answered the ghost of Agamemnon, "for having
died at Troy far from Argos, while the bravest of the Trojans and the
Achaeans fell round you fighting for your body. There you lay in the
whirling clouds of dust, all huge and hugely, heedless now of your
chivalry. We fought the whole of the livelong day, nor should we ever
have left off if Jove had not sent a hurricane to stay us. Then, when we
had borne you to the ships out of the fray, we laid you on your bed and
cleansed your fair skin with warm water and with ointments. The Danaans
tore their hair and wept bitterly round about you. Your mother, when she
heard, came with her immortal nymphs from out of the sea, and the sound
of a great wailing went forth over the waters so that the Achaeans
quaked for fear. They would have fled panic-stricken to their ships had
not wise old Nestor whose counsel was ever truest checked them saying,
'Hold, Argives, fly not sons of the Achaeans, this is his mother coming
from the sea with her immortal nymphs to view the body of her son.'

"Thus he spoke, and the Achaeans feared no more. The daughters of the
old man of the sea stood round you weeping bitterly, and clothed you
in immortal raiment. The nine muses also came and lifted up their sweet
voices in lament--calling and answering one another; there was not an
Argive but wept for pity of the dirge they chaunted. Days and nights
seven and ten we mourned you, mortals and immortals, but on the
eighteenth day we gave you to the flames, and many a fat sheep with many
an ox did we slay in sacrifice around you. You were burnt in raiment of
the gods, with rich resins and with honey, while heroes, horse and foot,
clashed their armour round the pile as you were burning, with the tramp
as of a great multitude. But when the flames of heaven had done
their work, we gathered your white bones at daybreak and laid them in
ointments and in pure wine. Your mother brought us a golden vase to hold
them--gift of Bacchus, and work of Vulcan himself; in this we mingled
your bleached bones with those of Patroclus who had gone before you, and
separate we enclosed also those of Antilochus, who had been closer to
you than any other of your comrades now that Patroclus was no more.

"Over these the host of the Argives built a noble tomb, on a point
jutting out over the open Hellespont, that it might be seen from far
out upon the sea by those now living and by them that shall be born
hereafter. Your mother begged prizes from the gods, and offered them
to be contended for by the noblest of the Achaeans. You must have
been present at the funeral of many a hero, when the young men gird
themselves and make ready to contend for prizes on the death of some
great chieftain, but you never saw such prizes as silver-footed Thetis
offered in your honour; for the gods loved you well. Thus even in death
your fame, Achilles, has not been lost, and your name lives evermore
among all mankind. But as for me, what solace had I when the days of my
fighting were done? For Jove willed my destruction on my return, by the
hands of Aegisthus and those of my wicked wife."

Thus did they converse, and presently Mercury came up to them with the
ghosts of the suitors who had been killed by Ulysses. The ghosts of
Agamemnon and Achilles were astonished at seeing them, and went up
to them at once. The ghost of Agamemnon recognised Amphimedon son of
Melaneus, who lived in Ithaca and had been his host, so it began to talk
to him.

"Amphimedon," it said, "what has happened to all you fine young men--all
of an age too--that you are come down here under the ground? One could
pick no finer body of men from any city. Did Neptune raise his winds and
waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies make an end
of you on the mainland when you were cattle-lifting or sheep-stealing,
or while fighting in defence of their wives and city? Answer my
question, for I have been your guest. Do you not remember how I came to
your house with Menelaus, to persuade Ulysses to join us with his ships
against Troy? It was a whole month ere we could resume our voyage, for
we had hard work to persuade Ulysses to come with us."

And the ghost of Amphimedon answered, "Agamemnon, son of Atreus, king of
men, I remember everything that you have said, and will tell you fully
and accurately about the way in which our end was brought about. Ulysses
had been long gone, and we were courting his wife, who did not say point
blank that she would not marry, nor yet bring matters to an end, for she
meant to compass our destruction: this, then, was the trick she played
us. She set up a great tambour frame in her room and began to work on an
enormous piece of fine needlework. 'Sweethearts,' said she, 'Ulysses
is indeed dead, still, do not press me to marry again immediately;
wait--for I would not have my skill in needlework perish
unrecorded--till I have completed a pall for the hero Laertes, against
the time when death shall take him. He is very rich, and the women of
the place will talk if he is laid out without a pall.' This is what she
said, and we assented; whereupon we could see her working upon her great
web all day long, but at night she would unpick the stitches again
by torchlight. She fooled us in this way for three years without our
finding it out, but as time wore on and she was now in her fourth year,
in the waning of moons and many days had been accomplished, one of her
maids who knew what she was doing told us, and we caught her in the act
of undoing her work, so she had to finish it whether she would or no;
and when she showed us the robe she had made, after she had had it
washed, {186} its splendour was as that of the sun or moon.

"Then some malicious god conveyed Ulysses to the upland farm where his
swineherd lives. Thither presently came also his son, returning from
a voyage to Pylos, and the two came to the town when they had hatched
their plot for our destruction. Telemachus came first, and then after
him, accompanied by the swineherd, came Ulysses, clad in rags and
leaning on a staff as though he were some miserable old beggar. He came
so unexpectedly that none of us knew him, not even the older ones among
us, and we reviled him and threw things at him. He endured both being
struck and insulted without a word, though he was in his own house; but
when the will of Aegis-bearing Jove inspired him, he and Telemachus
took the armour and hid it in an inner chamber, bolting the doors behind
them. Then he cunningly made his wife offer his bow and a quantity
of iron to be contended for by us ill-fated suitors; and this was the
beginning of our end, for not one of us could string the bow--nor nearly
do so. When it was about to reach the hands of Ulysses, we all of us
shouted out that it should not be given him, no matter what he might
say, but Telemachus insisted on his having it. When he had got it in his
hands he strung it with ease and sent his arrow through the iron. Then
he stood on the floor of the cloister and poured his arrows on the
ground, glaring fiercely about him. First he killed Antinous, and then,
aiming straight before him, he let fly his deadly darts and they fell
thick on one another. It was plain that some one of the gods was
helping them, for they fell upon us with might and main throughout the
cloisters, and there was a hideous sound of groaning as our brains
were being battered in, and the ground seethed with our blood. This,
Agamemnon, is how we came by our end, and our bodies are lying still
uncared for in the house of Ulysses, for our friends at home do not
yet know what has happened, so that they cannot lay us out and wash
the black blood from our wounds, making moan over us according to the
offices due to the departed."

"Happy Ulysses, son of Laertes," replied the ghost of Agamemnon, "you
are indeed blessed in the possession of a wife endowed with such rare
excellence of understanding, and so faithful to her wedded lord as
Penelope the daughter of Icarius. The fame, therefore, of her virtue
shall never die, and the immortals shall compose a song that shall be
welcome to all mankind in honour of the constancy of Penelope. How far
otherwise was the wickedness of the daughter of Tyndareus who killed her
lawful husband; her song shall be hateful among men, for she has brought
disgrace on all womankind even on the good ones."

Thus did they converse in the house of Hades deep down within the bowels
of the earth. Meanwhile Ulysses and the others passed out of the town
and soon reached the fair and well-tilled farm of Laertes, which he
had reclaimed with infinite labour. Here was his house, with a lean-to
running all round it, where the slaves who worked for him slept and sat
and ate, while inside the house there was an old Sicel woman, who looked
after him in this his country-farm. When Ulysses got there, he said to
his son and to the other two:

"Go to the house, and kill the best pig that you can find for dinner.
Meanwhile I want to see whether my father will know me, or fail to
recognise me after so long an absence."

He then took off his armour and gave it to Eumaeus and Philoetius, who
went straight on to the house, while he turned off into the vineyard to
make trial of his father. As he went down into the great orchard, he did
not see Dolius, nor any of his sons nor of the other bondsmen, for they
were all gathering thorns to make a fence for the vineyard, at the place
where the old man had told them; he therefore found his father alone,
hoeing a vine. He had on a dirty old shirt, patched and very shabby;
his legs were bound round with thongs of oxhide to save him from the
brambles, and he also wore sleeves of leather; he had a goat skin cap on
his head, and was looking very woe-begone. When Ulysses saw him so worn,
so old and full of sorrow, he stood still under a tall pear tree and
began to weep. He doubted whether to embrace him, kiss him, and tell him
all about his having come home, or whether he should first question him
and see what he would say. In the end he deemed it best to be crafty
with him, so in this mind he went up to his father, who was bending down
and digging about a plant.

"I see, sir," said Ulysses, "that you are an excellent gardener--what
pains you take with it, to be sure. There is not a single plant, not a
fig tree, vine, olive, pear, nor flower bed, but bears the trace of your
attention. I trust, however, that you will not be offended if I say
that you take better care of your garden than of yourself. You are old,
unsavoury, and very meanly clad. It cannot be because you are idle that
your master takes such poor care of you, indeed your face and figure
have nothing of the slave about them, and proclaim you of noble birth.
I should have said that you were one of those who should wash well, eat
well, and lie soft at night as old men have a right to do; but tell me,
and tell me true, whose bondman are you, and in whose garden are you
working? Tell me also about another matter. Is this place that I have
come to really Ithaca? I met a man just now who said so, but he was a
dull fellow, and had not the patience to hear my story out when I was
asking him about an old friend of mine, whether he was still living, or
was already dead and in the house of Hades. Believe me when I tell you
that this man came to my house once when I was in my own country and
never yet did any stranger come to me whom I liked better. He said that
his family came from Ithaca and that his father was Laertes, son of
Arceisius. I received him hospitably, making him welcome to all the
abundance of my house, and when he went away I gave him all customary
presents. I gave him seven talents of fine gold, and a cup of solid
silver with flowers chased upon it. I gave him twelve light cloaks,
and as many pieces of tapestry; I also gave him twelve cloaks of single
fold, twelve rugs, twelve fair mantles, and an equal number of shirts.
To all this I added four good looking women skilled in all useful arts,
and I let him take his choice."

His father shed tears and answered, "Sir, you have indeed come to the
country that you have named, but it is fallen into the hands of wicked
people. All this wealth of presents has been given to no purpose. If
you could have found your friend here alive in Ithaca, he would have
entertained you hospitably and would have requited your presents amply
when you left him--as would have been only right considering what you
had already given him. But tell me, and tell me true, how many years is
it since you entertained this guest--my unhappy son, as ever was? Alas!
He has perished far from his own country; the fishes of the sea have
eaten him, or he has fallen a prey to the birds and wild beasts of some
continent. Neither his mother, nor I his father, who were his parents,
could throw our arms about him and wrap him in his shroud, nor could
his excellent and richly dowered wife Penelope bewail her husband as was
natural upon his death bed, and close his eyes according to the offices
due to the departed. But now, tell me truly for I want to know. Who
and whence are you--tell me of your town and parents? Where is the
ship lying that has brought you and your men to Ithaca? Or were you a
passenger on some other man's ship, and those who brought you here have
gone on their way and left you?"

"I will tell you everything," answered Ulysses, "quite truly. I come
from Alybas, where I have a fine house. I am son of king Apheidas, who
is the son of Polypemon. My own name is Eperitus; heaven drove me off my
course as I was leaving Sicania, and I have been carried here against
my will. As for my ship it is lying over yonder, off the open country
outside the town, and this is the fifth year since Ulysses left my
country. Poor fellow, yet the omens were good for him when he left me.
The birds all flew on our right hands, and both he and I rejoiced to
see them as we parted, for we had every hope that we should have another
friendly meeting and exchange presents."

A dark cloud of sorrow fell upon Laertes as he listened. He filled both
hands with the dust from off the ground and poured it over his grey
head, groaning heavily as he did so. The heart of Ulysses was touched,
and his nostrils quivered as he looked upon his father; then he sprang
towards him, flung his arms about him and kissed him, saying, "I am he,
father, about whom you are asking--I have returned after having been
away for twenty years. But cease your sighing and lamentation--we have
no time to lose, for I should tell you that I have been killing the
suitors in my house, to punish them for their insolence and crimes."

"If you really are my son Ulysses," replied Laertes, "and have come back
again, you must give me such manifest proof of your identity as shall
convince me."

"First observe this scar," answered Ulysses, "which I got from a boar's
tusk when I was hunting on Mt. Parnassus. You and my mother had sent me
to Autolycus, my mother's father, to receive the presents which when he
was over here he had promised to give me. Furthermore I will point out
to you the trees in the vineyard which you gave me, and I asked you all
about them as I followed you round the garden. We went over them all,
and you told me their names and what they all were. You gave me thirteen
pear trees, ten apple trees, and forty fig trees; you also said you
would give me fifty rows of vines; there was corn planted between each
row, and they yield grapes of every kind when the heat of heaven has
been laid heavy upon them."

Laertes' strength failed him when he heard the convincing proofs which
his son had given him. He threw his arms about him, and Ulysses had to
support him, or he would have gone off into a swoon; but as soon as he
came to, and was beginning to recover his senses, he said, "O father
Jove, then you gods are still in Olympus after all, if the suitors have
really been punished for their insolence and folly. Nevertheless, I
am much afraid that I shall have all the townspeople of Ithaca up here
directly, and they will be sending messengers everywhere throughout the
cities of the Cephallenians."

Ulysses answered, "Take heart and do not trouble yourself about that,
but let us go into the house hard by your garden. I have already told
Telemachus, Philoetius, and Eumaeus to go on there and get dinner ready
as soon as possible."

Thus conversing the two made their way towards the house. When they got
there they found Telemachus with the stockman and the swineherd cutting
up meat and mixing wine with water. Then the old Sicel woman took
Laertes inside and washed him and anointed him with oil. She put him on
a good cloak, and Minerva came up to him and gave him a more imposing
presence, making him taller and stouter than before. When he came back
his son was surprised to see him looking so like an immortal, and said
to him, "My dear father, some one of the gods has been making you much
taller and better-looking."

Laertes answered, "Would, by Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that
I were the man I was when I ruled among the Cephallenians, and took
Nericum, that strong fortress on the foreland. If I were still what I
then was and had been in our house yesterday with my armour on, I should
have been able to stand by you and help you against the suitors. I
should have killed a great many of them, and you would have rejoiced to
see it."

Thus did they converse; but the others, when they had finished their
work and the feast was ready, left off working, and took each his proper
place on the benches and seats. Then they began eating; by and by old
Dolius and his sons left their work and came up, for their mother, the
Sicel woman who looked after Laertes now that he was growing old, had
been to fetch them. When they saw Ulysses and were certain it was he,
they stood there lost in astonishment; but Ulysses scolded them good
naturedly and said, "Sit down to your dinner, old man, and never mind
about your surprise; we have been wanting to begin for some time and
have been waiting for you."

Then Dolius put out both his hands and went up to Ulysses. "Sir," said
he, seizing his master's hand and kissing it at the wrist, "we have long
been wishing you home: and now heaven has restored you to us after we
had given up hoping. All hail, therefore, and may the gods prosper you.
{187} But tell me, does Penelope already know of your return, or shall
we send some one to tell her?"

"Old man," answered Ulysses, "she knows already, so you need not trouble
about that." On this he took his seat, and the sons of Dolius gathered
round Ulysses to give him greeting and embrace him one after the other;
then they took their seats in due order near Dolius their father.

While they were thus busy getting their dinner ready, Rumour went round
the town, and noised abroad the terrible fate that had befallen the
suitors; as soon, therefore, as the people heard of it they gathered
from every quarter, groaning and hooting before the house of Ulysses.
They took the dead away, buried every man his own, and put the bodies
of those who came from elsewhere on board the fishing vessels, for the
fishermen to take each of them to his own place. They then met angrily
in the place of assembly, and when they were got together Eupeithes
rose to speak. He was overwhelmed with grief for the death of his son
Antinous, who had been the first man killed by Ulysses, so he said,
weeping bitterly, "My friends, this man has done the Achaeans great
wrong. He took many of our best men away with him in his fleet, and he
has lost both ships and men; now, moreover, on his return he has been
killing all the foremost men among the Cephallenians. Let us be up and
doing before he can get away to Pylos or to Elis where the Epeans rule,
or we shall be ashamed of ourselves for ever afterwards. It will be an
everlasting disgrace to us if we do not avenge the murder of our sons
and brothers. For my own part I should have no more pleasure in life,
but had rather die at once. Let us be up, then, and after them, before
they can cross over to the main land."

He wept as he spoke and every one pitied him. But Medon and the bard
Phemius had now woke up, and came to them from the house of Ulysses.
Every one was astonished at seeing them, but they stood in the middle of
the assembly, and Medon said, "Hear me, men of Ithaca. Ulysses did not
do these things against the will of heaven. I myself saw an immortal god
take the form of Mentor and stand beside him. This god appeared, now in
front of him encouraging him, and now going furiously about the court
and attacking the suitors whereon they fell thick on one another."

On this pale fear laid hold of them, and old Halitherses, son of Mastor,
rose to speak, for he was the only man among them who knew both past and
future; so he spoke to them plainly and in all honesty, saying,

"Men of Ithaca, it is all your own fault that things have turned out as
they have; you would not listen to me, nor yet to Mentor, when we
bade you check the folly of your sons who were doing much wrong in the
wantonness of their hearts--wasting the substance and dishonouring the
wife of a chieftain who they thought would not return. Now, however, let
it be as I say, and do as I tell you. Do not go out against Ulysses, or
you may find that you have been drawing down evil on your own heads."

This was what he said, and more than half raised a loud shout, and at
once left the assembly. But the rest stayed where they were, for the
speech of Halitherses displeased them, and they sided with Eupeithes;
they therefore hurried off for their armour, and when they had armed
themselves, they met together in front of the city, and Eupeithes led
them on in their folly. He thought he was going to avenge the murder
of his son, whereas in truth he was never to return, but was himself to
perish in his attempt.

Then Minerva said to Jove, "Father, son of Saturn, king of kings, answer
me this question--What do you propose to do? Will you set them fighting
still further, or will you make peace between them?"

And Jove answered, "My child, why should you ask me? Was it not by your
own arrangement that Ulysses came home and took his revenge upon the
suitors? Do whatever you like, but I will tell you what I think will
be most reasonable arrangement. Now that Ulysses is revenged, let them
swear to a solemn covenant, in virtue of which he shall continue to
rule, while we cause the others to forgive and forget the massacre of
their sons and brothers. Let them then all become friends as heretofore,
and let peace and plenty reign."

This was what Minerva was already eager to bring about, so down she
darted from off the topmost summits of Olympus.

Now when Laertes and the others had done dinner, Ulysses began by
saying, "Some of you go out and see if they are not getting close up
to us." So one of Dolius's sons went as he was bid. Standing on the
threshold he could see them all quite near, and said to Ulysses, "Here
they are, let us put on our armour at once."

They put on their armour as fast as they could--that is to say Ulysses,
his three men, and the six sons of Dolius. Laertes also and Dolius did
the same--warriors by necessity in spite of their grey hair. When they
had all put on their armour, they opened the gate and sallied forth,
Ulysses leading the way.

Then Jove's daughter Minerva came up to them, having assumed the form
and voice of Mentor. Ulysses was glad when he saw her, and said to
his son Telemachus, "Telemachus, now that you are about to fight in an
engagement, which will show every man's mettle, be sure not to disgrace
your ancestors, who were eminent for their strength and courage all the
world over."

"You say truly, my dear father," answered Telemachus, "and you shall
see, if you will, that I am in no mind to disgrace your family."

Laertes was delighted when he heard this. "Good heavens," he exclaimed,
"what a day I am enjoying: I do indeed rejoice at it. My son and
grandson are vying with one another in the matter of valour."

On this Minerva came close up to him and said, "Son of Arceisius---best
friend I have in the world--pray to the blue-eyed damsel, and to Jove
her father; then poise your spear and hurl it."

As she spoke she infused fresh vigour into him, and when he had prayed
to her he poised his spear and hurled it. He hit Eupeithes' helmet, and
the spear went right through it, for the helmet stayed it not, and
his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.
Meantime Ulysses and his son fell upon the front line of the foe and
smote them with their swords and spears; indeed, they would have killed
every one of them, and prevented them from ever getting home again,
only Minerva raised her voice aloud, and made every one pause. "Men of
Ithaca," she cried, "cease this dreadful war, and settle the matter at
once without further bloodshed."

On this pale fear seized every one; they were so frightened that their
arms dropped from their hands and fell upon the ground at the sound of
the goddess' voice, and they fled back to the city for their lives. But
Ulysses gave a great cry, and gathering himself together swooped down
like a soaring eagle. Then the son of Saturn sent a thunderbolt of fire
that fell just in front of Minerva, so she said to Ulysses, "Ulysses,
noble son of Laertes, stop this warful strife, or Jove will be angry
with you."

Thus spoke Minerva, and Ulysses obeyed her gladly. Then Minerva assumed
the form and voice of Mentor, and presently made a covenant of peace
between the two contending parties.



                        FOOTNOTES

{1} Black races are evidently known to the writer as stretching all
across Africa, one half looking West on to the Atlantic, and the other
East on to the Indian Ocean.

{2} The original use of the footstool was probably less to rest the feet
than to keep them (especially when bare) from a floor which was often
wet and dirty.

{3} The [Greek] or seat, is occasionally called "high," as being higher
than the [Greek] or low footstool. It was probably no higher than an
ordinary chair is now, and seems to have had no back.

{4} Temesa was on the West Coast of the toe of Italy, in what is now the
gulf of Sta Eufemia. It was famous in remote times for its copper mines,
which, however, were worked out when Strabo wrote.

{5} i.e. "with a current in it"--see illustrations and map near the end
of bks. v. and vi. respectively.

{6} Reading [Greek] for [Greek], cf. "Od." iii. 81 where the same
mistake is made, and xiii. 351 where the mountain is called Neritum, the
same place being intended both here and in book xiii.

{7} It is never plausibly explained why Penelope cannot do this, and
from bk. ii. it is clear that she kept on deliberately encouraging the
suitors, though we are asked to believe that she was only fooling them.

{8} See note on "Od." i. 365.

{9} Middle Argos means the Peleponnese which, however, is never so
called in the "Iliad". I presume "middle" means "middle between the two
Greek-speaking countries of Asia Minor and Sicily, with South Italy";
for that parts of Sicily and also large parts, though not the whole of
South Italy, were inhabited by Greek-speaking races centuries before the
Dorian colonisations can hardly be doubted. The Sicians, and also the
Sicels, both of them probably spoke Greek.

{10} cf. "Il." vi. 490-495. In the "Iliad" it is "war," not "speech,"
that is a man's matter. It argues a certain hardness, or at any rate
dislike of the "Iliad" on the part of the writer of the "Odyssey,"
that she should have adopted Hector's farewell to Andromache here, as
elsewhere in the poem, for a scene of such inferior pathos.

{11} [Greek] The whole open court with the covered cloister running
round it was called [Greek], or [Greek], but the covered part was
distinguished by being called "shady" or "shadow-giving". It was in this
part that the tables for the suitors were laid. The Fountain Court at
Hampton Court may serve as an illustration (save as regards the use of
arches instead of wooden supports and rafters) and the arrangement
is still common in Sicily. The usual translation "shadowy" or "dusky"
halls, gives a false idea of the scene.

{12} The reader will note the extreme care which the writer takes to
make it clear that none of the suitors were allowed to sleep in Ulysses'
house.

{13} See Appendix; g, in plan of Ulysses' house.

{14} I imagine this passage to be a rejoinder to "Il." xxiii. 702-705 in
which a tripod is valued at twelve oxen, and a good useful maid of
all work at only four. The scrupulous regard of Laertes for his wife's
feelings is of a piece with the extreme jealousy for the honour of
woman, which is manifest throughout the "Odyssey".

{15} [Greek] "The [Greek], or tunica, was a shirt or shift, and served
as the chief under garment of the Greeks and Romans, whether men
or women." Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities, under
"Tunica".

{16} Doors fastened to all intents and purposes as here described may be
seen in the older houses at Trapani. There is a slot on the outer side
of the door by means of which a person who has left the room can shoot
the bolt. My bedroom at the Albergo Centrale was fastened in this way.

{17} [Greek] So we vulgarly say "had cooked his goose," or "had settled
his hash." Aegyptus cannot of course know of the fate Antiphus had met
with, for there had as yet been no news of or from Ulysses.

{18} "Il." xxii. 416. [Greek] The authoress has bungled by borrowing
these words verbatim from the "Iliad", without prefixing the necessary
"do not," which I have supplied.

{19} i.e. you have money, and could pay when I got judgment, whereas the
suitors are men of straw.

{20} cf. "Il." ii. 76. [Greek]. The Odyssean passage runs [Greek]. Is
it possible not to suspect that the name Mentor was coined upon that of
Nestor?

{21} i.e. in the outer court, and in the uncovered part of the inner
house.

{22} This would be fair from Sicily, which was doing duty for Ithaca in
the mind of the writer, but a North wind would have been preferable for
a voyage from the real Ithaca to Pylos.

{23} [Greek] The wind does not whistle over waves. It only whistles
through rigging or some other obstacle that cuts it.

{24} cf. "Il." v.20. [Greek] The Odyssean line is [Greek]. There can
be no doubt that the Odyssean line was suggested by the Iliadic, but
nothing can explain why Idaeus jumping from his chariot should suggest
to the writer of the "Odyssey" the sun jumping from the sea. The
probability is that she never gave the matter a thought, but took the
line in question as an effect of saturation with the "Iliad," and of
unconscious cerebration. The "Odyssey" contains many such examples.

{25} The heart, liver, lights, kidneys, etc. were taken out from the
inside and eaten first as being more readily cooked; the [Greek], or
bone meat, was cooking while the [Greek] or inward parts were being
eaten. I imagine that the thigh bones made a kind of gridiron, while at
the same time the marrow inside them got cooked.

{26} i.e. skewers, either single, double, or even five pronged. The meat
would be pierced with the skewer, and laid over the ashes to grill--the
two ends of the skewer being supported in whatever way convenient. Meat
so cooking may be seen in any eating house in Smyrna, or any Eastern
town. When I rode across the Troad from the Dardanelles to Hissarlik and
Mount Ida, I noticed that my dragoman and his men did all our outdoor
cooking exactly in the Odyssean and Iliadic fashion.

{27} cf. "Il." xvii. 567. [Greek] The Odyssean lines are--[Greek]

{28} Reading [Greek] for [Greek], cf. "Od." i.186.

{29} The geography of the Aegean as above described is correct, but is
probably taken from the lost poem, the Nosti, the existence of which is
referred to "Od." i.326,327 and 350, etc. A glance at the map will show
that heaven advised its supplicants quite correctly.

{30} The writer--ever jealous for the honour of women--extenuates
Clytemnestra's guilt as far as possible, and explains it as due to her
having been left unprotected, and fallen into the hands of a wicked man.

{31} The Greek is [Greek] cf. "Iliad" ii. 408 [Greek] Surely the [Greek]
of the Odyssean passage was due to the [Greek] of the "Iliad." No other
reason suggests itself for the making Menelaus return on the very day of
the feast given by Orestes. The fact that in the "Iliad" Menelaus came
to a banquet without waiting for an invitation, determines the writer
of the "Odyssey" to make him come to a banquet, also uninvited, but
as circumstances did not permit of his having been invited, his coming
uninvited is shown to have been due to chance. I do not think the
authoress thought all this out, but attribute the strangeness of the
coincidence to unconscious cerebration and saturation.

{32} cf. "Il." i.458, ii. 421. The writer here interrupts an Iliadic
passage (to which she returns immediately) for the double purpose of
dwelling upon the slaughter of the heifer, and of letting Nestor's wife
and daughter enjoy it also. A male writer, if he was borrowing from the
"Iliad," would have stuck to his borrowing.

{33} cf. "Il." xxiv. 587,588 where the lines refer to the washing the
dead body of Hector.

{34} See illustration on opposite page. The yard is typical of many that
may be seen in Sicily. The existing ground-plan is probably unmodified
from Odyssean, and indeed long pre-Odyssean times, but the earlier
buildings would have no arches, and would, one would suppose, be mainly
timber. The Odyssean [Greek] were the sheds that ran round the yard
as the arches do now. The [Greek] was the one through which the main
entrance passed, and which was hence "noisy," or reverberating. It had
an upper story in which visitors were often lodged.

{35} This journey is an impossible one. Telemachus and Pisistratus would
have been obliged to drive over the Taygetus range, over which there has
never yet been a road for wheeled vehicles. It is plain therefore that
the audience for whom the "Odyssey" was written was one that would be
unlikely to know anything about the topography of the Peloponnese, so
that the writer might take what liberties she chose.

{36} The lines which I have enclosed in brackets are evidently an
afterthought--added probably by the writer herself--for they evince
the same instinctively greater interest in anything that may concern a
woman, which is so noticeable throughout the poem. There is no further
sign of any special festivities nor of any other guests than Telemachus
and Pisistratus, until lines 621-624 (ordinarily enclosed in brackets)
are abruptly introduced, probably with a view of trying to carry off the
introduction of the lines now in question.

The addition was, I imagine, suggested by a desire to excuse and explain
the non-appearance of Hermione in bk. xv., as also of both Hermione and
Megapenthes in the rest of bk. iv. Megapenthes in bk. xv. seems to be
still a bachelor: the presumption therefore is that bk. xv. was written
before the story of his marriage here given. I take it he is only
married here because his sister is being married. She having been
properly attended to, Megapenthes might as well be married at the same
time. Hermione could not now be less than thirty.

I have dealt with this passage somewhat more fully in my "Authoress of
the Odyssey", p.136-138. See also p. 256 of the same book.

{37} Sparta and Lacedaemon are here treated as two different places,
though in other parts of the poem it is clear that the writer
understands them as one. The catalogue in the "Iliad," which the writer
is here presumably following, makes the same mistake ("Il." ii. 581,582)

{38} These last three lines are identical with "Il." vxiii. 604-606.

{39} From the Greek [Greek] it is plain that Menelaus took up the piece
of meat with his fingers.

{40} Amber is never mentioned in the "Iliad." Sicily, where I suppose
the "Odyssey" to have been written, has always been, and still is, one
of the principal amber producing countries. It was probably the only one
known in the Odyssean age. See "The Authoress of the Odyssey", p260.

{41} This no doubt refers to the story told in the last poem of the
Cypria about Paris and Helen robbing Menelaus of the greater part of his
treasures, when they sailed together for Troy.

{42} It is inconceivable that Helen should enter thus, in the middle of
supper, intending to work with her distaff, if great festivities were
going on. Telemachus and Pisistratus are evidently dining en famille.

{43} In the Italian insurrection of 1848, eight young men who were being
hotly pursued by the Austrian police hid themselves inside Donatello's
colossal wooden horse in the Salone at Padua, and remained there for
a week being fed by their confederates. In 1898 the last survivor was
carried round Padua in triumph.

{44} The Greek is [Greek]. Is it unfair to argue that the writer is a
person of somewhat delicate sensibility, to whom a strong smell of fish
is distasteful?

{45} The Greek is [Greek]. I believe this to be a hit at the writer's
own countrymen who were of Phocaean descent, and the next following line
to be a rejoinder to complaints made against her in bk. vi. 273-288, to
the effect that she gave herself airs and would marry none of her own
people. For that the writer of the "Odyssey" was the person who has
been introduced into the poem under the name of Nausicaa, I cannot bring
myself to question. I may remind English readers that [Greek] (i.e.
phoca) means "seal." Seals almost always appear on Phocaean coins.

{46} Surely here again we are in the hands of a writer of delicate
sensibility. It is not as though the seals were stale; they had only
just been killed. The writer, however is obviously laughing at her own
countrymen, and insulting them as openly as she dares.

{47} We were told above (lines 357,357) that it was only one day's sail.

{48} I give the usual translation, but I do not believe the Greek will
warrant it. The Greek reads [Greek].

This is usually held to mean that Ithaca is an island fit for breeding
goats, and on that account more delectable to the speaker than it would
have been if it were fit for breeding horses. I find little authority
for such a translation; the most equitable translation of the text as it
stands is, "Ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats, and delectable
rather than fit for breeding horses; for not one of the islands is good
driving ground, nor well meadowed." Surely the writer does not mean that
a pleasant or delectable island would not be fit for breeding horses?
The most equitable translation, therefore, of the present text being
thus halt and impotent, we may suspect corruption, and I hazard the
following emendation, though I have not adopted it in my translation, as
fearing that it would be deemed too fanciful. I would read:--[Greek].

As far as scanning goes the [Greek] is not necessary; [Greek] iv. 72,
[Greek] iv. 233, to go no further afield than earlier lines of the same
book, give sufficient authority for [Greek], but the [Greek] would not
be redundant; it would emphasise the surprise of the contrast, and I
should prefer to have it, though it is not very important either way.
This reading of course should be translated "Ithaca is an island fit for
breeding goats, and (by your leave) itself a horseman rather than
fit for breeding horses--for not one of the islands is good and well
meadowed ground."

This would be sure to baffle the Alexandrian editors. "How," they would
ask themselves, "could an island be a horseman?" and they would cast
about for an emendation. A visit to the top of Mt. Eryx might perhaps
make the meaning intelligible, and suggest my proposed restoration of
the text to the reader as readily as it did to myself.

I have elsewhere stated my conviction that the writer of the "Odyssey"
was familiar with the old Sican city at the top of Mt. Eryx, and that
the Aegadean islands which are so striking when seen thence did duty
with her for the Ionian islands--Marettimo, the highest and most
westerly of the group, standing for Ithaca. When seen from the top of
Mt. Eryx Marettimo shows as it should do according to "Od." ix. 25,26,
"on the horizon, all highest up in the sea towards the West," while
the other islands lie "some way off it to the East." As we descend
to Trapani, Marettimo appears to sink on to the top of the island of
Levanzo, behind which it disappears. My friend, the late Signor E.
Biaggini, pointed to it once as it was just standing on the top of
Levanzo, and said to me "Come cavalca bene" ("How well it rides"), and
this immediately suggested my emendation to me. Later on I found in
the hymn to the Pythian Apollo (which abounds with tags taken from the
"Odyssey") a line ending [Greek] which strengthened my suspicion that
this was the original ending of the second of the two lines above under
consideration.

{49} See note on line 3 of this book. The reader will observe that
the writer has been unable to keep the women out of an interpolation
consisting only of four lines.

{50} Scheria means a piece of land jutting out into the sea. In my
"Authoress of the Odyssey" I thought "Jutland" would be a suitable
translation, but it has been pointed out to me that "Jutland" only means
the land of the Jutes.

{51} Irrigation as here described is common in gardens near Trapani. The
water that supplies the ducts is drawn from wells by a mule who turns a
wheel with buckets on it.

{52} There is not a word here about the cattle of the sun-god.

{53} The writer evidently thought that green, growing wood might also be
well seasoned.

{54} The reader will note that the river was flowing with salt water
i.e. that it was tidal.

{55} Then the Ogygian island was not so far off, but that Nausicaa might
be assumed to know where it was.

{56} Greek [Greek]

{57} I suspect a family joke, or sly allusion to some thing of which
we know nothing, in this story of Eurymedusa's having been brought from
Apeira. The Greek word "apeiros" means "inexperienced," "ignorant." Is
it possible that Eurymedusa was notoriously incompetent?

{58} Polyphemus was also son to Neptune, see "Od." ix. 412,529. he was
therefore half brother to Nausithous, half uncle to King Alcinous, and
half great uncle to Nausicaa.

{59} It would seem as though the writer thought that Marathon was close
to Athens.

{60} Here the writer, knowing that she is drawing (with embellishments)
from things actually existing, becomes impatient of past tenses and
slides into the present.

{61} This is hidden malice, implying that the Phaeacian magnates were
no better than they should be. The final drink-offering should have been
made to Jove or Neptune, not to the god of thievishness and rascality
of all kinds. In line 164 we do indeed find Echeneus proposing that
a drink-offering should be made to Jove, but Mercury is evidently,
according to our authoress, the god who was most likely to be of use to
them.

{62} The fact of Alcinous knowing anything about the Cyclopes suggests
that in the writer's mind Scheria and the country of the Cyclopes were
not very far from one another. I take the Cyclopes and the giants to be
one and the same people.

{63} "My property, etc." The authoress is here adopting an Iliadic line
(xix. 333), and this must account for the absence of all reference
to Penelope. If she had happened to remember "Il." v.213, she would
doubtless have appropriated it by preference, for that line reads "my
country, my wife, and all the greatness of my house."

{64} The at first inexplicable sleep of Ulysses (bk. xiii. 79, etc.)
is here, as also in viii. 445, being obviously prepared. The writer
evidently attached the utmost importance to it. Those who know that the
harbour which did duty with the writer of the "Odyssey" for the one in
which Ulysses landed in Ithaca, was only about 2 miles from the place
in which Ulysses is now talking with Alcinous, will understand why the
sleep was so necessary.

{65} There were two classes--the lower who were found in provisions
which they had to cook for themselves in the yards and outer precincts,
where they would also eat--and the upper who would eat in the cloisters
of the inner court, and have their cooking done for them.

{66} Translation very dubious. I suppose the [Greek] here to be the
covered sheds that ran round the outer courtyard. See illustrations at
the end of bk. iii.

{67} The writer apparently deems that the words "as compared with what
oxen can plough in the same time" go without saying. Not so the writer
of the "Iliad" from which the Odyssean passage is probably taken. He
explains that mules can plough quicker than oxen ("Il." x.351-353)

{68} It was very fortunate that such a disc happened to be there, seeing
that none like it were in common use.

{69} "Il." xiii. 37. Here, as so often elsewhere in the "Odyssey," the
appropriation of an Iliadic line which is not quite appropriate puzzles
the reader. The "they" is not the chains, nor yet Mars and Venus. It is
an overflow from the Iliadic passage in which Neptune hobbles his horses
in bonds "which none could either unloose or break so that they might
stay there in that place." If the line would have scanned without the
addition of the words "so that they might stay there in that place,"
they would have been omitted in the "Odyssey."

{70} The reader will note that Alcinous never goes beyond saying that
he is going to give the goblet; he never gives it. Elsewhere in both
"Iliad" and "Odyssey" the offer of a present is immediately followed by
the statement that it was given and received gladly--Alcinous actually
does give a chest and a cloak and shirt--probably also some of the corn
and wine for the long two-mile voyage was provided by him--but it is
quite plain that he gave no talent and no cup.

{71} "Il." xviii, 344-349. These lines in the "Iliad" tell of the
preparation for washing the body of Patroclus, and I am not pleased that
the writer of the "Odyssey" should have adopted them here.

{72} see note {64}

{73} see note {43}

{74} The reader will find this threat fulfilled in bk. xiii

{75} If the other islands lay some distance away from Ithaca (which
the word [Greek] suggests), what becomes of the [Greek] or gut between
Ithaca and Samos which we hear of in Bks. iv. and xv.? I suspect that
the authoress in her mind makes Telemachus come back from Pylos to the
Lilybaean promontory and thence to Trapani through the strait between
the Isola Grande and the mainland--the island of Asteria being the one
on which Motya afterwards stood.

{76} "Il." xviii. 533-534. The sudden lapse into the third person here
for a couple of lines is due to the fact that the two Iliadic lines
taken are in the third person.

{77} cf. "Il." ii. 776. The words in both "Iliad" and "Odyssey" are
[Greek]. In the "Iliad" they are used of the horses of Achilles'
followers as they stood idle, "champing lotus."

{78} I take all this passage about the Cyclopes having no ships to
be sarcastic--meaning, "You people of Drepanum have no excuse for not
colonising the island of Favognana, which you could easily do, for you
have plenty of ships, and the island is a very good one." For that
the island so fully described here is the Aegadean or "goat" island of
Favognana, and that the Cyclopes are the old Sican inhabitants of Mt.
Eryx should not be doubted.

{79} For the reasons why it was necessary that the night should be so
exceptionally dark see "The Authoress of the Odyssey" pp. 188-189.

{80} None but such lambs as would suck if they were with their mothers
would be left in the yard. The older lambs should have been out feeding.
The authoress has got it all wrong, but it does not matter. See "The
Authoress of the Odyssey" p.148.

{81} This line is enclosed in brackets in the received text, and is
omitted (with note) by Messrs. Butcher & Lang. But lines enclosed in
brackets are almost always genuine; all that brackets mean is that the
bracketed passage puzzled some early editor, who nevertheless found
it too well established in the text to venture on omitting it. In the
present case the line bracketed is the very last which a full-grown male
editor would be likely to interpolate. It is safer to infer that the
writer, a young woman, not knowing or caring at which end of the ship
the rudder should be, determined to make sure by placing it at both
ends, which we shall find she presently does by repeating it (line 340)
at the stern of the ship. As for the two rocks thrown, the first I take
to be the Asinelli, see map facing p.80. The second I see as the two
contiguous islands of the Formiche, which are treated as one, see map
facing p.108. The Asinelli is an island shaped like a boat, and pointing
to the island of Favognana. I think the authoress's compatriots, who
probably did not like her much better that she did them, jeered at the
absurdity of Ulysses' conduct, and saw the Asinelli or "donkeys," not as
the rock thrown by Polyphemus, but as the boat itself containing Ulysses
and his men.

{82} This line exists in the text here but not in the corresponding
passage xii. 141. I am inclined to think it is interpolated (probably
by the poetess herself) from the first of lines xi. 115-137, which I can
hardly doubt were added by the writer when the scheme of the work was
enlarged and altered. See "The Authoress of the Odyssey" pp. 254-255.

{83} "Floating" ([Greek]) is not to be taken literally. The island
itself, as apart from its inhabitants, was quite normal. There is no
indication of its moving during the month that Ulysses stayed with
Aeolus, and on his return from his unfortunate voyage, he seems to
have found it in the same place. The [Greek] in fact should no more be
pressed than [Greek] as applied to islands, "Odyssey" xv. 299--where
they are called "flying" because the ship would fly past them. So also
the "Wanderers," as explained by Buttmann; see note on "Odyssey" xii.
57.

{84} Literally "for the ways of the night and of the day are near." I
have seen what Mr. Andrew Lang says ("Homer and the Epic," p.236, and
"Longman's Magazine" for January, 1898, p.277) about the "amber route"
and the "Sacred Way" in this connection; but until he gives his grounds
for holding that the Mediterranean peoples in the Odyssean age used to
go far North for their amber instead of getting it in Sicily, where it
is still found in considerable quantities, I do not know what weight I
ought to attach to his opinion. I have been unable to find grounds
for asserting that B.C. 1000 there was any commerce between the
Mediterranean and the "Far North," but I shall be very ready to learn
if Mr. Lang will enlighten me. See "The Authoress of the Odyssey" pp.
185-186.

{85} One would have thought that when the sun was driving the stag down
to the water, Ulysses might have observed its whereabouts.

{86} See Hobbes of Malmesbury's translation.

{87} "Il." vxiii. 349. Again the writer draws from the washing the body
of Patroclus--which offends.

{88} This visit is wholly without topographical significance.

{89} Brides presented themselves instinctively to the imagination of the
writer, as the phase of humanity which she found most interesting.

{90} Ulysses was, in fact, to become a missionary and preach Neptune to
people who knew not his name. I was fortunate enough to meet in Sicily
a woman carrying one of these winnowing shovels; it was not much shorter
than an oar, and I was able at once to see what the writer of the
"Odyssey" intended.

{91} I suppose the lines I have enclosed in brackets to have been added
by the author when she enlarged her original scheme by the addition of
books i.-iv. and xiii. (from line 187)-xxiv. The reader will observe
that in the corresponding passage (xii. 137-141) the prophecy ends with
"after losing all your comrades," and that there is no allusion to the
suitors. For fuller explanation see "The Authoress of the Odyssey" pp.
254-255.

{92} The reader will remember that we are in the first year of Ulysses'
wanderings, Telemachus therefore was only eleven years old. The same
anachronism is made later on in this book. See "The Authoress of the
Odyssey" pp. 132-133.

{93} Tradition says that she had hanged herself. Cf. "Odyssey" xv. 355,
etc.

{94} Not to be confounded with Aeolus king of the winds.

{95} Melampus, vide book xv. 223, etc.

{96} I have already said in a note on bk. xi. 186 that at this point of
Ulysses' voyage Telemachus could only be between eleven and twelve years
old.

{97} Is the writer a man or a woman?

{98} Cf. "Il." iv. 521, [Greek]. The Odyssean line reads, [Greek]. The
famous dactylism, therefore, of the Odyssean line was probably suggested
by that of the Ileadic rather than by a desire to accommodate sound to
sense. At any rate the double coincidence of a dactylic line, and an
ending [Greek], seems conclusive as to the familiarity of the writer of
the "Odyssey" with the Iliadic line.

{99} Off the coast of Sicily and South Italy, in the month of May, I
have seen men fastened half way up a boat's mast with their feet resting
on a crosspiece, just large enough to support them. From this point
of vantage they spear sword-fish. When I saw men thus employed I could
hardly doubt that the writer of the "Odyssey" had seen others like them,
and had them in her mind when describing the binding of Ulysses. I have
therefore with some diffidence ventured to depart from the received
translation of [Greek] (cf. Alcaeus frag. 18, where, however, it is
very hard to say what [Greek] means). In Sophocles' Lexicon I find a
reference to Chrysostom (l, 242, A. Ed. Benedictine Paris 1834-1839)
for the word [Greek], which is probably the same as [Greek], but I have
looked for the passage in vain.

{100} The writer is at fault here and tries to put it off on Circe. When
Ulysses comes to take the route prescribed by Circe, he ought to pass
either the Wanderers or some other difficulty of which we are not told,
but he does not do so. The Planctae, or Wanderers, merge into Scylla and
Charybdis, and the alternative between them and something untold
merges into the alternative whether Ulysses had better choose Scylla or
Charybdis. Yet from line 260, it seems we are to consider the Wanderers
as having been passed by Ulysses; this appears even more plainly from
xxiii. 327, in which Ulysses expressly mentions the Wandering rocks as
having been between the Sirens and Scylla and Charybdis. The writer,
however, is evidently unaware that she does not quite understand her own
story; her difficulty was perhaps due to the fact that though Trapanese
sailors had given her a fair idea as to where all her other localities
really were, no one in those days more than in our own could localise
the Planctae, which in fact, as Buttmann has argued, were derived not
from any particular spot, but from sailors' tales about the difficulties
of navigating the group of the Aeolian islands as a whole (see note on
"Od." x. 3). Still the matter of the poor doves caught her fancy, so she
would not forgo them. The whirlwinds of fire and the smoke that hangs on
Scylla suggests allusion to Stromboli and perhaps even Etna. Scylla is
on the Italian side, and therefore may be said to look West. It is about
8 miles thence to the Sicilian coast, so Ulysses may be perfectly well
told that after passing Scylla he will come to the Thrinacian island or
Sicily. Charybdis is transposed to a site some few miles to the north of
its actual position.

{101} I suppose this line to have been intercalated by the author when
lines 426-446 were added.

{102} For the reasons which enable us to identify the island of the two
Sirens with the Lipari island now Salinas--the ancient Didyme, or "twin"
island--see The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp. 195, 196. The two
Sirens doubtless were, as their name suggests, the whistling gusts, or
avalanches of air that at times descend without a moment's warning from
the two lofty mountains of Salinas--as also from all high points in the
neighbourhood.

{103} See Admiral Smyth on the currents in the Straits of Messina,
quoted in "The Authoress of the Odyssey," p. 197.

{104} In the islands of Favognana and Marettimo off Trapani I have seen
men fish exactly as here described. They chew bread into a paste and
throw it into the sea to attract the fish, which they then spear. No
line is used.

{105} The writer evidently regards Ulysses as on a coast that looked
East at no great distance south of the Straits of Messina somewhere,
say, near Tauromenium, now Taormina.

{106} Surely there must be a line missing here to tell us that the keel
and mast were carried down into Charybdis. Besides, the aorist [Greek]
in its present surrounding is perplexing. I have translated it as though
it were an imperfect; I see Messrs. Butcher and Lang translate it as
a pluperfect, but surely Charybdis was in the act of sucking down the
water when Ulysses arrived.

{107} I suppose the passage within brackets to have been an afterthought
but to have been written by the same hand as the rest of the poem. I
suppose xii. 103 to have been also added by the writer when she decided
on sending Ulysses back to Charybdis. The simile suggests the hand of
the wife or daughter of a magistrate who had often seen her father come
in cross and tired.

{108} Gr. [Greek]. This puts coined money out of the question, but
nevertheless implies that the gold had been worked into ornaments of
some kind.

{109} I suppose Teiresias' prophecy of bk. xi. 114-120 had made no
impression on Ulysses. More probably the prophecy was an afterthought,
intercalated, as I have already said, by the authoress when she changed
her scheme.

{110} A male writer would have made Ulysses say, not "may you give
satisfaction to your wives," but "may your wives give satisfaction to
you."

{111} See note {64}.

{112} The land was in reality the shallow inlet, now the salt works of
S. Cusumano--the neighbourhood of Trapani and Mt. Eryx being made to do
double duty, both as Scheria and Ithaca. Hence the necessity for making
Ulysses set out after dark, fall instantly into a profound sleep, and
wake up on a morning so foggy that he could not see anything till the
interviews between Neptune and Jove and between Ulysses and Minerva
should have given the audience time to accept the situation. See
illustrations and map near the end of bks. v. and vi. respectively.

{113} This cave, which is identifiable with singular completeness, is
now called the "grotta del toro," probably a corruption of "tesoro," for
it is held to contain a treasure. See The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp.
167-170.

{114} Probably they would.

{115} Then it had a shallow shelving bottom.

{116} Doubtless the road would pass the harbour in Odyssean times as it
passes the salt works now; indeed, if there is to be a road at all there
is no other level ground which it could take. See map above referred to.

{117} The rock at the end of the Northern harbour of Trapani, to which
I suppose the writer of the "Odyssey" to be here referring, still bears
the name Malconsiglio--"the rock of evil counsel." There is a legend
that it was a ship of Turkish pirates who were intending to attack
Trapani, but the "Madonna di Trapani" crushed them under this rock just
as they were coming into port. My friend Cavaliere Giannitrapani of
Trapani told me that his father used to tell him when he was a boy that
if he would drop exactly three drops of oil on to the water near the
rock, he would see the ship still at the bottom. The legend is evidently
a Christianised version of the Odyssean story, while the name supplies
the additional detail that the disaster happened in consequence of an
evil counsel.

{118} It would seem then that the ship had got all the way back from
Ithaca in about a quarter of an hour.

{119} And may we not add "and also to prevent his recognising that he
was only in the place where he had met Nausicaa two days earlier."

{120} All this is to excuse the entire absence of Minerva from books
ix.-xii., which I suppose had been written already, before the authoress
had determined on making Minerva so prominent a character.

{121} We have met with this somewhat lame attempt to cover the writer's
change of scheme at the end of bk. vi.

{122} I take the following from The Authoress of the Odyssey, p. 167.
"It is clear from the text that there were two [caves] not one, but some
one has enclosed in brackets the two lines in which the second cave is
mentioned, I presume because he found himself puzzled by having a second
cave sprung upon him when up to this point he had only been told of one.

"I venture to think that if he had known the ground he would not have
been puzzled, for there are two caves, distant about 80 or 100 yards
from one another." The cave in which Ulysses hid his treasure is, as I
have already said, identifiable with singular completeness. The other
cave presents no special features, neither in the poem nor in nature.

{123} There is no attempt to disguise the fact that Penelope had long
given encouragement to the suitors. The only defence set up is that she
did not really mean to encourage them. Would it not have been wiser to
have tried a little discouragement?

{124} See map near the end of bk. vi. Ruccazzu dei corvi of course means
"the rock of the ravens." Both name and ravens still exist.

{125} See The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp. 140, 141. The real reason
for sending Telemachus to Pylos and Lacedaemon was that the authoress
might get Helen of Troy into her poem. He was sent at the only point in
the story at which he could be sent, so he must have gone then or not at
all.

{126} The site I assign to Eumaeus's hut, close to the Ruccazzu dei
Corvi, is about 2,000 feet above the sea, and commands an extensive
view.

{127} Sandals such as Eumaeus was making are still worn in the Abruzzi
and elsewhere. An oblong piece of leather forms the sole: holes are cut
at the four corners, and through these holes leathern straps are passed,
which are bound round the foot and cross-gartered up the calf.

{128} See note {75}

{129} Telemachus like many another good young man seems to expect every
one to fetch and carry for him.

{130} "Il." vi. 288. The store room was fragrant because it was made of
cedar wood. See "Il." xxiv. 192.

{131} cf. "Il." vi. 289 and 293-296. The dress was kept at the bottom
of the chest as one that would only be wanted on the greatest occasions;
but surely the marriage of Hermione and of Megapenthes (bk, iv. ad
init.) might have induced Helen to wear it on the preceding evening,
in which case it could hardly have got back. We find no hint here of
Megapenthes' recent marriage.

{132} See note {83}.

{133} cf. "Od." xi. 196, etc.

{134} The names Syra and Ortygia, on which island a great part of the
Doric Syracuse was originally built, suggest that even in Odyssean times
there was a prehistoric Syracuse, the existence of which was known to
the writer of the poem.

{135} Literally "where are the turnings of the sun." Assuming, as we may
safely do, that the Syra and Ortygia of the "Odyssey" refer to Syracuse,
it is the fact that not far to the South of these places the land turns
sharply round, so that mariners following the coast would find the
sun upon the other side of their ship to that on which they'd had it
hitherto.

Mr. A. S. Griffith has kindly called my attention to Herod iv. 42,
where, speaking of the circumnavigation of Africa by Phoenician mariners
under Necos, he writes:

"On their return they declared--I for my part do not believe them, but
perhaps others may--that in sailing round Libya [i.e. Africa] they had
the sun upon their right hand. In this way was the extent of Libya first
discovered.

"I take it that Eumaeus was made to have come from Syracuse because
the writer thought she rather ought to have made something happen at
Syracuse during her account of the voyages of Ulysses. She could
not, however, break his long drift from Charybdis to the island of
Pantellaria; she therefore resolved to make it up to Syracuse in another
way."

{135} Modern excavations establish the existence of two and only two
pre-Dorian communities at Syracuse; they were, so Dr. Orsi informed me,
at Plemmirio and Cozzo Pantano. See The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp.
211-213.

{136} This harbour is again evidently the harbour in which Ulysses had
landed, i.e. the harbour that is now the salt works of S. Cusumano.

{137} This never can have been anything but very niggardly pay for some
eight or nine days' service. I suppose the crew were to consider the
pleasure of having had a trip to Pylos as a set off. There is no trace
of the dinner as having been actually given, either on the following or
any other morning.

{138} No hawk can tear its prey while it is on the wing.

{139} The text is here apparently corrupt, and will not make sense as it
stands. I follow Messrs. Butcher and Lang in omitting line 101.

{140} i.e. to be milked, as in South Italian and Sicilian towns at the
present day.

{141} The butchering and making ready the carcases took place partly in
the outer yard and partly in the open part of the inner court.

{142} These words cannot mean that it would be afternoon soon after they
were spoken. Ulysses and Eumaeus reached the town which was "some way
off" (xvii. 25) in time for the suitor's early meal (xvii. 170 and 176)
say at ten or eleven o' clock. The context of the rest of the book shows
this. Eumaeus and Ulysses, therefore, cannot have started later than
eight or nine, and Eumaeus's words must be taken as an exaggeration for
the purpose of making Ulysses bestir himself.

{143} I imagine the fountain to have been somewhere about where the
church of the Madonna di Trapani now stands, and to have been fed with
water from what is now called the Fontana Diffali on Mt. Eryx.

{144} From this and other passages in the "Odyssey" it appears that
we are in an age anterior to the use of coined money--an age when
cauldrons, tripods, swords, cattle, chattels of all kinds, measures
of corn, wine, or oil, etc. etc., not to say pieces of gold, silver,
bronze, or even iron, wrought more or less, but unstamped, were the
nearest approach to a currency that had as yet been reached.

{145} Gr. is [Greek]

{146} I correct these proofs abroad and am not within reach of Hesiod,
but surely this passage suggests acquaintance with the Works and Ways,
though it by no means compels it.

{147} It would seem as though Eurynome and Euryclea were the same
person. See note {156}

{148} It is plain, therefore, that Iris was commonly accepted as the
messenger of the gods, though our authoress will never permit her to
fetch or carry for any one.

{149} i.e. the doorway leading from the inner to the outer court.

{150} Surely in this scene, again, Eurynome is in reality Euryclea. See
note {156}

{151} These, I imagine, must have been in the open part of the inner
courtyard, where the maids also stood, and threw the light of their
torches into the covered cloister that ran all round it. The smoke would
otherwise have been intolerable.

{152} Translation very uncertain; vide Liddell and Scott, under [Greek]

{153} See photo on opposite page.

{154} cf. "Il." ii. 184, and 217, 218. An additional and well-marked
feature being wanted to convince Penelope, the writer has taken the
hunched shoulders of Thersites (who is mentioned immediately after
Eurybates in the "Iliad") and put them on to Eurybates' back.

{155} This is how geese are now fed in Sicily, at any rate in summer,
when the grass is all burnt up. I have never seen them grazing.

{156} Lower down (line 143) Euryclea says it was herself that had thrown
the cloak over Ulysses--for the plural should not be taken as implying
more than one person. The writer is evidently still fluctuating between
Euryclea and Eurynome as the name for the old nurse. She probably
originally meant to call her Euryclea, but finding it not immediately
easy to make Euryclea scan in xvii. 495, she hastily called her
Eurynome, intending either to alter this name later or to change the
earlier Euryclea's into Eurynome. She then drifted in to Eurynome
as convenience further directed, still nevertheless hankering after
Euryclea, till at last she found that the path of least resistance
would lie in the direction of making Eurynome and Euryclea two persons.
Therefore in xxiii. 289-292 both Eurynome and "the nurse" (who can be
none other than Euryclea) come on together. I do not say that this is
feminine, but it is not unfeminine.

{157} See note {156}

{158} This, I take it, was immediately in front of the main entrance of
the inner courtyard into the body of the house.

{159} This is the only allusion to Sardinia in either "Iliad" or
"Odyssey."

{160} The normal translation of the Greek word would be "holding back,"
"curbing," "restraining," but I cannot think that the writer meant
this--she must have been using the word in its other sense of "having,"
"holding," "keeping," "maintaining."

{161} I have vainly tried to realise the construction of the fastening
here described.

{162} See plan of Ulysses' house in the appendix. It is evident that the
open part of the court had no flooring but the natural soil.

{163} See plan of Ulysses' house, and note {175}.

{164} i.e. the door that led into the body of the house.

{165} This was, no doubt, the little table that was set for Ulysses,
"Od." xx. 259.

Surely the difficulty of this passage has been overrated. I suppose
the iron part of the axe to have been wedged into the handle, or bound
securely to it--the handle being half buried in the ground. The axe
would be placed edgeways towards the archer, and he would have to shoot
his arrow through the hole into which the handle was fitted when the axe
was in use. Twelve axes were placed in a row all at the same height,
all exactly in front of one another, all edgeways to Ulysses whose arrow
passed through all the holes from the first onward. I cannot see how the
Greek can bear any other interpretation, the words being, [Greek]

"He did not miss a single hole from the first onwards." [Greek]
according to Liddell and Scott being "the hole for the handle of an
axe, etc.," while [Greek] ("Od." v. 236) is, according to the same
authorities, the handle itself. The feat is absurdly impossible, but our
authoress sometimes has a soul above impossibilities.

{166} The reader will note how the spoiling of good food distresses the
writer even in such a supreme moment as this.

{167} Here we have it again. Waste of substance comes first.

{168} cf. "Il." iii. 337 and three other places. It is strange that
the author of the "Iliad" should find a little horse-hair so alarming.
Possibly enough she was merely borrowing a common form line from some
earlier poet--or poetess--for this is a woman's line rather than a
man's.

{169} Or perhaps simply "window." See plan in the appendix.

{170} i.e. the pavement on which Ulysses was standing.

{171} The interpretation of lines 126-143 is most dubious, and at best
we are in a region of melodrama: cf., however, i.425, etc. from which it
appears that there was a tower in the outer court, and that Telemachus
used to sleep in it. The [Greek] I take to be a door, or trap door,
leading on to the roof above Telemachus's bed room, which we are told
was in a place that could be seen from all round--or it might be simply
a window in Telemachus's room looking out into the street. From the
top of the tower the outer world was to be told what was going on, but
people could not get in by the [Greek]: they would have to come in by
the main entrance, and Melanthius explains that the mouth of the narrow
passage (which was in the lands of Ulysses and his friends) commanded
the only entrance by which help could come, so that there would be
nothing gained by raising an alarm. As for the [Greek] of line 143,
no commentator ancient or modern has been able to say what was
intended--but whatever they were, Melanthius could never carry twelve
shields, twelve helmets, and twelve spears. Moreover, where he could
go the others could go also. If a dozen suitors had followed Melanthius
into the house they could have attacked Ulysses in the rear, in which
case, unless Minerva had intervened promptly, the "Odyssey" would have
had a different ending. But throughout the scene we are in a region of
extravagance rather than of true fiction--it cannot be taken seriously
by any but the very serious, until we come to the episode of Phemius and
Medon, where the writer begins to be at home again.

{172} I presume it was intended that there should be a hook driven into
the bearing-post.

{173} What for?

{174} Gr: [Greek]. This is not [Greek].

{175} From lines 333 and 341 of this book, and lines 145 and 146 of bk.
xxi we can locate the approach to the [Greek] with some certainty.

{176} But in xix. 500-502 Ulysses scolded Euryclea for offering
information on this very point, and declared himself quite able to
settle it for himself.

{177} There were a hundred and eight Suitors.

{178} Lord Grimthorpe, whose understanding does not lend itself to easy
imposition, has been good enough to write to me about my conviction that
the "Odyssey" was written by a woman, and to send me remarks upon the
gross absurdity of the incident here recorded. It is plain that all
the authoress cared about was that the women should be hanged: as for
attempting to realise, or to make her readers realise, how the hanging
was done, this was of no consequence. The reader must take her word for
it and ask no questions. Lord Grimthorpe wrote:

"I had better send you my ideas about Nausicaa's hanging of the
maids (not 'maidens,' of whom Froude wrote so well in his 'Science of
History') before I forget it all. Luckily for me Liddell & Scott have
specially translated most of the doubtful words, referring to this very
place.

"A ship's cable. I don't know how big a ship she meant, but it must have
been a very small one indeed if its 'cable' could be used to tie tightly
round a woman's neck, and still more round a dozen of them 'in a row,'
besides being strong enough to hold them and pull them all up.

"A dozen average women would need the weight and strength of more than
a dozen strong heavy men even over the best pulley hung to the roof
over them; and the idea of pulling them up by a rope hung anyhow round a
pillar [Greek] is absurdly impossible; and how a dozen of them could be
hung dangling round one post is a problem which a senior wrangler would
be puzzled to answer... She had better have let Telemachus use his sword
as he had intended till she changed his mind for him."

{179} Then they had all been in Ulysses' service over twenty years;
perhaps the twelve guilty ones had been engaged more recently.

{180} Translation very doubtful--cf. "It." xxiv. 598.

{181} But why could she not at once ask to see the scar, of which
Euryclea had told her, or why could not Ulysses have shown it to her?

{182} The people of Ithaca seem to have been as fond of carping as the
Phaeacians were in vi. 273, etc.

{183} See note {156}. Ulysses's bed room does not appear to have been
upstairs, nor yet quite within the house. Is it possible that it was
"the domed room" round the outside of which the erring maids were, for
aught we have heard to the contrary, still hanging?

{184} Ulysses bedroom in the mind of the writer is here too apparently
down stairs.

{185} Penelope having been now sufficiently whitewashed, disappears from
the poem.

{186} So practised a washerwoman as our authoress doubtless knew that by
this time the web must have become such a wreck that it would have gone
to pieces in the wash.

A lady points out to me, just as these sheets are leaving my hands, that
no really good needlewoman--no one, indeed, whose work or character was
worth consideration--could have endured, no matter for what reason, the
unpicking of her day's work, day after day for between three and four
years.

{187} We must suppose Dolius not yet to know that his son Melanthius
had been tortured, mutilated, and left to die by Ulysses' orders on the
preceding day, and that his daughter Melantho had been hanged. Dolius
was probably exceptionally simple-minded, and his name was ironical.
So on Mt. Eryx I was shown a man who was always called Sonza Malizia or
"Guileless"--he being held exceptionally cunning.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Odyssey, by Homer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ODYSSEY ***

***** This file should be named 1727.txt or 1727.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/2/1727/

Produced by Jim Tinsley

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

